<h2><a name="QUIET_WORK" id="QUIET_WORK"></a>QUIET WORK</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">One lesson, Nature, let me learn of thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One lesson which in every wind is blown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One lesson of two duties kept at one<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though the loud world proclaim their enmity&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Of toil unsever'd from tranquillity!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of labour, that in lasting fruit outgrows<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far noisier schemes, accomplish'd in repose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Too great for haste, too high for rivalry!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes, while on earth a thousand discords ring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man's fitful uproar mingling with his toil,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still do thy sleepless ministers move on,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Their glorious tasks in silence perfecting;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still working, blaming still our vain turmoil,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Labourers that shall not fail, when man is gone.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_2" id="Page_2">[2]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="TO_A_FRIEND" id="TO_A_FRIEND"></a>TO A FRIEND</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Who prop, thou ask'st, in these bad days, my mind?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He much, the old man, who, clearest-soul'd of men,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Saw The Wide Prospect, and the Asian Fen,<a name="FNanchor_1_3" id="FNanchor_1_3"></a><a href="#Footnote_1_3" class="fnanchor">[1]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Tmolus hill, and Smyrna bay, though blind.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Much he, whose friendship I not long since won,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That halting slave, who in Nicopolis<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Taught Arrian, when Vespasian's brutal son<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clear'd Rome of what most shamed him. But be his<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">My special thanks, whose even-balanced soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From first youth tested up to extreme old age,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Business could not make dull, nor passion wild;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Who saw life steadily, and saw it whole;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mellow glory of the Attic stage,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Singer of sweet Colonus, and its child.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="SHAKESPEARE" id="SHAKESPEARE"></a>SHAKESPEARE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Others abide our question. Thou art free.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We ask and ask&mdash;Thou smilest and art still,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Out-topping knowledge. For the loftiest hill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who to the stars uncrowns his majesty,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Planting his steadfast footsteps in the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Making the heaven of heavens his dwelling-place,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Spares but the cloudy border of his base<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the foil'd searching of mortality;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_3" id="Page_3">[3]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And thou, who didst the stars and sunbeams know,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Self-school'd, self-scann'd, self-honour'd, self-secure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Didst tread on earth unguess'd at.&mdash;Better so!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">All pains the immortal spirit must endure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All weakness which impairs, all griefs which bow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Find their sole speech in that victorious brow.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="WRITTEN_IN_EMERSONS_ESSAYS" id="WRITTEN_IN_EMERSONS_ESSAYS"></a>WRITTEN IN EMERSON'S ESSAYS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"O monstrous, dead, unprofitable world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That thou canst hear, and hearing, hold thy way!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A voice oracular hath peal'd to-day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To-day a hero's banner is unfurl'd;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hast thou no lip for welcome?"&mdash;So I said.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man after man, the world smiled and pass'd by;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A smile of wistful incredulity<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As though one spake of life unto the dead&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Scornful, and strange, and sorrowful, and full<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of bitter knowledge. Yet the will is free;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Strong is the soul, and wise, and beautiful;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The seeds of godlike power are in us still;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gods are we, bards, saints, heroes, if we will!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dumb judges, answer, truth or mockery?</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_4" id="Page_4">[4]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="WRITTEN_IN_BUTLERS_SERMONS" id="WRITTEN_IN_BUTLERS_SERMONS"></a>WRITTEN IN BUTLER'S SERMONS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Affections, Instincts, Principles, and Powers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Impulse and Reason, Freedom and Control&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So men, unravelling God's harmonious whole,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rend in a thousand shreds this life of ours.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Vain labour! Deep and broad, where none may see,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Spring the foundations of that shadowy throne<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where man's one nature, queen-like, sits alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Centred in a majestic unity;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And rays her powers, like sister-islands seen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Linking their coral arms under the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or cluster'd peaks with plunging gulfs between<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Spann'd by a&euml;rial arches all of gold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whereo'er the chariot wheels of life are roll'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In cloudy circles to eternity.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="TO_THE_DUKE_OF_WELLINGTON" id="TO_THE_DUKE_OF_WELLINGTON"></a>TO THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON</h2>

<h3>ON HEARING HIM MISPRAISED</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Because thou hast believed, the wheels of life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stand never idle, but go always round;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not by their hands, who vex the patient ground,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Moved only; but by genius, in the strife<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Of all its chafing torrents after thaw,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Urged; and to feed whose movement, spinning sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The feeble sons of pleasure set their hand;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, in this vision of the general law,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_5" id="Page_5">[5]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hast labour'd, but with purpose; hast become<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Laborious, persevering, serious, firm&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For this, thy track, across the fretful foam<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Of vehement actions without scope or term,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Call'd history, keeps a splendour; due to wit,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which saw one clue to life, and follow'd it.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="IN_HARMONY_WITH_NATURE" id="IN_HARMONY_WITH_NATURE"></a>IN HARMONY WITH NATURE</h2>

<h3>TO A PREACHER</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"In harmony with Nature?" Restless fool,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who with such heat dost preach what were to thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When true, the last impossibility&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To be like Nature strong, like Nature cool!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Know, man hath all which Nature hath, but more,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in that <i>more</i> lie all his hopes of good.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nature is cruel, man is sick of blood;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nature is stubborn, man would fain adore;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Nature is fickle, man hath need of rest;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nature forgives no debt, and fears no grave;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man would be mild, and with safe conscience blest.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Man must begin, know this, where Nature ends;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nature and man can never be fast friends.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fool, if thou canst not pass her, rest her slave!</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_6" id="Page_6">[6]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="TO_GEORGE_CRUIKSHANK" id="TO_GEORGE_CRUIKSHANK"></a>TO GEORGE CRUIKSHANK</h2>

<h3>ON SEEING, IN THE COUNTRY, HIS PICTURE OF
"THE BOTTLE"</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Artist, whose hand, with horror wing'd, hath torn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the rank life of towns this leaf! and flung<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The prodigy of full-blown crime among<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Valleys and men to middle fortune born,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not innocent, indeed, yet not forlorn&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Say, what shall calm us when such guests intrude<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like comets on the heavenly solitude?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall breathless glades, cheer'd by shy Dian's horn,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Cold-bubbling springs, or caves?&mdash;Not so! The soul<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Breasts her own griefs; and, urged too fiercely, says:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Why tremble? True, the nobleness of man<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">May be by man effaced; man can control<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To pain, to death, the bent of his own days.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Know thou the worst! So much, not more, he <i>can</i>."<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="TO_A_REPUBLICAN_FRIEND_1848" id="TO_A_REPUBLICAN_FRIEND_1848"></a>TO A REPUBLICAN FRIEND, 1848</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">God knows it, I am with you. If to prize<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Those virtues, prized and practised by too few,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But prized, but loved, but eminent in you,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man's fundamental life; if to despise<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The barren optimistic sophistries<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of comfortable moles, whom what they do<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Teaches the limit of the just and true<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(And for such doing they require not eyes);<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_7" id="Page_7">[7]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">If sadness at the long heart-wasting show<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wherein earth's great ones are disquieted;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If thoughts, not idle, while before me flow<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The armies of the homeless and unfed&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If these are yours, if this is what you are,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then am I yours, and what you feel, I share.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="CONTINUED" id="CONTINUED"></a>CONTINUED</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet, when I muse on what life is, I seem<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rather to patience prompted, than that proud<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prospect of hope which France proclaims so loud&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">France, famed in all great arts, in none supreme;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Seeing this vale, this earth, whereon we dream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is on all sides o'ershadow'd by the high<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Uno'erleap'd Mountains of Necessity,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sparing us narrower margin than we deem.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Nor will that day dawn at a human nod,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When, bursting through the network superposed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By selfish occupation&mdash;plot and plan,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Lust, avarice, envy&mdash;liberated man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All difference with his fellow-mortal closed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall be left standing face to face with God.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_8" id="Page_8">[8]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="RELIGIOUS_ISOLATION" id="RELIGIOUS_ISOLATION"></a>RELIGIOUS ISOLATION</h2>

<h3>TO THE SAME FRIEND</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Children (as such forgive them) have I known,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ever in their own eager pastime bent<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To make the incurious bystander, intent<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On his own swarming thoughts, an interest own&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Too fearful or too fond to play alone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do thou, whom light in thine own inmost soul<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(Not less thy boast) illuminates, control<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wishes unworthy of a man full-grown.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What though the holy secret, which moulds thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mould not the solid earth? though never winds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have whisper'd it to the complaining sea,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Nature's great law, and law of all men's minds?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To its own impulse every creature stirs;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Live by thy light, and earth will live by hers!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="MYCERINUS2" id="MYCERINUS2"></a>MYCERINUS<a name="FNanchor_2_4" id="FNanchor_2_4"></a><a href="#Footnote_2_4" class="fnanchor">[2]</a></h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Not by the justice that my father spurn'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not for the thousands whom my father slew,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Altars unfed and temples overturn'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cold hearts and thankless tongues, where thanks are due;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fell this dread voice from lips that cannot lie,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stern sentence of the Powers of Destiny.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_9" id="Page_9">[9]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"I will unfold my sentence and my crime.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My crime&mdash;that, rapt in reverential awe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I sate obedient, in the fiery prime<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of youth, self-govern'd, at the feet of Law;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ennobling this dull pomp, the life of kings,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By contemplation of diviner things.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"My father loved injustice, and lived long;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crown'd with gray hairs he died, and full of sway.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I loved the good he scorn'd, and hated wrong&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Gods declare my recompence to-day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I look'd for life more lasting, rule more high;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And when six years are measured, lo, I die!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Yet surely, O my people, did I deem<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man's justice from the all-just Gods was given;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A light that from some upper fount did beam,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some better archetype, whose seat was heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A light that, shining from the blest abodes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Did shadow somewhat of the life of Gods.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Mere phantoms of man's self-tormenting heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which on the sweets that woo it dares not feed!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vain dreams, which quench our pleasures, then depart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the duped soul, self-master'd, claims its meed;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When, on the strenuous just man, Heaven bestows,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crown of his struggling life, an unjust close!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Seems it so light a thing, then, austere Powers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To spurn man's common lure, life's pleasant things?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seems there no joy in dances crown'd with flowers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Love, free to range, and regal banquetings?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bend ye on these, indeed, an unmoved eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not Gods but ghosts, in frozen apathy?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_10" id="Page_10">[10]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Or is it that some Force, too wise, too strong,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even for yourselves to conquer or beguile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sweeps earth, and heaven, and men, and gods along,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like the broad volume of the insurgent Nile?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the great powers we serve, themselves may be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Slaves of a tyrannous necessity?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Or in mid-heaven, perhaps, your golden cars,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where earthly voice climbs never, wing their flight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in wild hunt, through mazy tracts of stars,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sweep in the sounding stillness of the night?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or in deaf ease, on thrones of dazzling sheen,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Drinking deep draughts of joy, ye dwell serene?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Oh, wherefore cheat our youth, if thus it be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of one short joy, one lust, one pleasant dream?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stringing vain words of powers we cannot see,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blind divinations of a will supreme;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lost labour! when the circumambient gloom<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But hides, if Gods, Gods careless of our doom?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"The rest I give to joy. Even while I speak,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My sand runs short; and&mdash;as yon star-shot ray,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hemm'd by two banks of cloud, peers pale and weak,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now, as the barrier closes, dies away&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even so do past and future intertwine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blotting this six years' space, which yet is mine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Six years&mdash;six little years&mdash;six drops of time!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet suns shall rise, and many moons shall wane,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And old men die, and young men pass their prime,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And languid pleasure fade and flower again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the dull Gods behold, ere these are flown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Revels more deep, joy keener than their own.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_11" id="Page_11">[11]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Into the silence of the groves and woods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I will go forth; though something would I say&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Something&mdash;yet what, I know not; for the Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The doom they pass revoke not, nor delay;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And prayers, and gifts, and tears, are fruitless all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the night waxes, and the shadows fall.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Ye men of Egypt, ye have heard your king!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I go, and I return not. But the will<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the great Gods is plain; and ye must bring<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ill deeds, ill passions, zealous to fulfil<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their pleasure, to their feet; and reap their praise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The praise of Gods, rich boon! and length of days."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">&mdash;So spake he, half in anger, half in scorn;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And one loud cry of grief and of amaze<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Broke from his sorrowing people; so he spake,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And turning, left them there; and with brief pause,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Girt with a throng of revellers, bent his way<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the cool region of the groves he loved.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There by the river-banks he wander'd on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From palm-grove on to palm-grove, happy trees,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their smooth tops shining sunward, and beneath<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Burying their unsunn'd stems in grass and flowers;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where in one dream the feverish time of youth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might fade in slumber, and the feet of joy<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might wander all day long and never tire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here came the king, holding high feast, at morn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rose-crown'd; and ever, when the sun went down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A hundred lamps beam'd in the tranquil gloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From tree to tree all through the twinkling grove,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Revealing all the tumult of the feast&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flush'd guests, and golden goblets foam'd with wine;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_12" id="Page_12">[12]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">While the deep-burnish'd foliage overhead<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Splinter'd the silver arrows of the moon.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It may be that sometimes his wondering soul<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the loud joyful laughter of his lips<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might shrink half startled, like a guilty man<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who wrestles with his dream; as some pale shape<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gliding half hidden through the dusky stems,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would thrust a hand before the lifted bowl,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whispering: <i>A little space, and thou art mine!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">It may be on that joyless feast his eye<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dwelt with mere outward seeming; he, within,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Took measure of his soul, and knew its strength,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And by that silent knowledge, day by day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was calm'd, ennobled, comforted, sustain'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It may be; but not less his brow was smooth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his clear laugh fled ringing through the gloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his mirth quail'd not at the mild reproof<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sigh'd out by winter's sad tranquillity;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor, pall'd with its own fulness, ebb'd and died<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the rich languor of long summer-days;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor wither'd when the palm-tree plumes, that roof'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With their mild dark his grassy banquet-hall,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bent to the cold winds of the showerless spring;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No, nor grew dark when autumn brought the clouds.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So six long years he revell'd, night and day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And when the mirth wax'd loudest, with dull sound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sometimes from the grove's centre echoes came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To tell his wondering people of their king;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the still night, across the steaming flats,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mix'd with the murmur of the moving Nile.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_13" id="Page_13">[13]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="THE_CHURCH_OF_BROU" id="THE_CHURCH_OF_BROU"></a>THE CHURCH OF BROU</h2>


<h3>I</h3>
<h3>The Castle</h3>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Down the Savoy valleys sounding,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Echoing round this castle old,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Mid the distant mountain-chalets<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Hark! what bell for church is toll'd?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In the bright October morning<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Savoy's Duke had left his bride.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the castle, past the drawbridge,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Flow'd the hunters' merry tide.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Steeds are neighing, gallants glittering;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Gay, her smiling lord to greet,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From her mullion'd chamber-casement<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Smiles the Duchess Marguerite.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">From Vienna, by the Danube,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Here she came, a bride, in spring.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Now the autumn crisps the forest;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Hunters gather, bugles ring.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Hounds are pulling, prickers swearing,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Horses fret, and boar-spears glance.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Off!&mdash;They sweep the marshy forests,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Westward, on the side of France.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Hark! the game's on foot; they scatter!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Down the forest-ridings lone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Furious, single horsemen gallop&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Hark! a shout&mdash;a crash&mdash;a groan!
<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_14" id="Page_14">[14]</a></span><br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Pale and breathless, came the hunters;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">On the turf dead lies the boar&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">God! the Duke lies stretch'd beside him,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Senseless, weltering in his gore.<br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In the dull October evening,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Down the leaf-strewn forest-road,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the castle, past the drawbridge,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Came the hunters with their load.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In the hall, with sconces blazing,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ladies waiting round her seat,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Clothed in smiles, beneath the da&iuml;s<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Sate the Duchess Marguerite.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Hark! below the gates unbarring!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Tramp of men and quick commands!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"&mdash;'Tis my lord come back from hunting&mdash;"<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And the Duchess claps her hands.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Slow and tired, came the hunters&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Stopp'd in darkness in the court.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"&mdash;Ho, this way, ye laggard hunters!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">To the hall! What sport? What sport?"&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Slow they enter'd with their master;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In the hall they laid him down.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On his coat were leaves and blood-stains,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">On his brow an angry frown.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Dead her princely youthful husband<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Lay before his youthful wife,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bloody, 'neath the flaring sconces&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And the sight froze all her life.<br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In Vienna, by the Danube,<br /></span><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_15" id="Page_15">[15]</a></span>
<span class="i4">Kings hold revel, gallants meet.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gay of old amid the gayest<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Was the Duchess Marguerite.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In Vienna, by the Danube,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Feast and dance her youth beguiled.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Till that hour she never sorrow'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">But from then she never smiled.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">'Mid the Savoy mountain valleys<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Far from town or haunt of man,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stands a lonely church, unfinish'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Which the Duchess Maud began;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Old, that Duchess stern began it,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In gray age, with palsied hands;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But she died while it was building,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And the Church unfinish'd stands&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Stands as erst the builders left it,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">When she sank into her grave;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mountain greensward paves the chancel,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Harebells flower in the nave<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"&mdash;In my castle all is sorrow,"<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Said the Duchess Marguerite then;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Guide me, some one, to the mountain!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">We will build the Church again."&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Sandall'd palmers, faring homeward,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Austrian knights from Syria came.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"&mdash;Austrian wanderers bring, O warders!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Homage to your Austrian dame."<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_16" id="Page_16">[16]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">From the gate the warders answer'd:<br /></span>
<span class="i4">"&mdash;Gone, O knights, is she you knew!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dead our Duke, and gone his Duchess;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Seek her at the Church of Brou!"&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Austrian knights and much-worn palmers<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Climb the winding mountain-way&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Reach the valley, where the Fabric<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Rises higher day by day.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Stones are sawing, hammers ringing;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">On the work the bright sun shines,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the Savoy mountain-meadows,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">By the stream, below the pines.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">On her palfrey white the Duchess<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Sate and watch'd her working train&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Flemish carvers, Lombard gilders,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">German masons, smiths from Spain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Clad in black, on her white palfrey,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Her old architect beside&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There they found her in the mountains,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Morn and noon and eventide.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">There she sate, and watch'd the builders,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Till the Church was roof'd and done.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Last of all, the builders rear'd her<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In the nave a tomb of stone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">On the tomb two forms they sculptured,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Lifelike in the marble pale&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">One, the Duke in helm and armour;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">One, the Duchess in her veil.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_17" id="Page_17">[17]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Round the tomb the carved stone fretwork<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Was at Easter-tide put on.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then the Duchess closed her labours;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And she died at the St. John.<br /></span>
</div></div>

<h3>II</h3>
<h3>The Church</h3>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Upon the glistening leaden roof<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the new Pile, the sunlight shines;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The stream goes leaping by.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The hills are clothed with pines sun-proof;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Mid bright green fields, below the pines,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Stands the Church on high.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What Church is this, from men aloof?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Tis the Church of Brou.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">At sunrise, from their dewy lair<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crossing the stream, the kine are seen<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Round the wall to stray&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The churchyard wall that clips the square<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of open hill-sward fresh and green<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Where last year they lay.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But all things now are order'd fair<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Round the Church of Brou.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">On Sundays, at the matin-chime,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Alpine peasants, two and three,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Climb up here to pray;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Burghers and dames, at summer's prime,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ride out to church from Chambery,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Dight with mantles gay.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_18" id="Page_18">[18]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">But else it is a lonely time<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Round the Church of Brou.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">On Sundays, too, a priest doth come<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the wall'd town beyond the pass,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Down the mountain-way;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And then you hear the organ's hum,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">You hear the white-robed priest say mass,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And the people pray.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But else the woods and fields are dumb<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Round the Church of Brou.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And after church, when mass is done,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The people to the nave repair<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Round the tomb to stray;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And marvel at the Forms of stone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And praise the chisell'd broideries rare&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Then they drop away.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The princely Pair are left alone<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the Church of Brou.<br /></span>
</div></div>

<h3>III</h3>
<h3>The Tomb</h3>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So rest, for ever rest, O princely Pair!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In your high church, 'mid the still mountain-air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where horn, and hound, and vassals, never come.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Only the blessed Saints are smiling dumb,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the rich painted windows of the nave,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On aisle, and transept, and your marble grave;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where thou, young Prince! shall never more arise<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the fringed mattress where thy Duchess lies,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_19" id="Page_19">[19]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">On autumn-mornings, when the bugle sounds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And ride across the drawbridge with thy hounds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To hunt the boar in the crisp woods till eve;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou, O Princess! shalt no more receive,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou and thy ladies, in the hall of state,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The jaded hunters with their bloody freight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Coming benighted to the castle-gate.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So sleep, for ever sleep, O marble Pair!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or if ye wake, let it be then, when fair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the carved western front a flood of light<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Streams from the setting sun, and colours bright<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prophets, transfigured Saints, and Martyrs brave,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the vast western window of the nave;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the pavement round the Tomb there glints<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A chequer-work of glowing sapphire-tints,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And amethyst, and ruby&mdash;then unclose<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Your eyelids on the stone where ye repose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from your broider'd pillows lift your heads,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And rise upon your cold white marble beds;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, looking down on the warm rosy tints,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which chequer, at your feet, the illumined flints,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Say: <i>What is this? we are in bliss&mdash;forgiven&mdash;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Behold the pavement of the courts of Heaven!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or let it be on autumn nights, when rain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Doth rustlingly above your heads complain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the smooth leaden roof, and on the walls<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shedding her pensive light at intervals<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The moon through the clere-story windows shines,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the wind washes through the mountain-pines.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, gazing up 'mid the dim pillars high,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The foliaged marble forest where ye lie,<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Hush</i>, ye will say, <i>it is eternity!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>This is the glimmering verge of Heaven, and these</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_20" id="Page_20">[20]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The columns of the heavenly palaces!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, in the sweeping of the wind, your ear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The passage of the Angels' wings will hear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the lichen-crusted leads above<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The rustle of the eternal rain of love.<br /></span>
</div></div>


<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2>A MODERN SAPPHO</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">They are gone&mdash;all is still! Foolish heart, dost thou quiver?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nothing stirs on the lawn but the quick lilac-shade.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far up shines the house, and beneath flows the river&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here lean, my head, on this cold balustrade!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ere he come&mdash;ere the boat by the shining-branch'd border<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of dark elms shoot round, dropping down the proud stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let me pause, let me strive, in myself make some order,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ere their boat-music sound, ere their broider'd flags gleam.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Last night we stood earnestly talking together;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She enter'd&mdash;that moment his eyes turn'd from me!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fasten'd on her dark hair, and her wreath of white heather&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As yesterday was, so to-morrow will be.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Their love, let me know, must grow strong and yet stronger,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their passion burn more, ere it ceases to burn.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They must love&mdash;while they must! but the hearts that love longer<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are rare&mdash;ah! most loves but flow once, and return.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I shall suffer&mdash;but they will outlive their affection;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I shall weep&mdash;but their love will be cooling; and he,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As he drifts to fatigue, discontent, and dejection,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will be brought, thou poor heart, how much nearer to thee!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_21" id="Page_21">[21]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">For cold is his eye to mere beauty, who, breaking<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The strong band which passion around him hath furl'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Disenchanted by habit, and newly awaking,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Looks languidly round on a gloom-buried world.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Through that gloom he will see but a shadow appearing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Perceive but a voice as I come to his side&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But deeper their voice grows, and nobler their bearing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose youth in the fires of anguish hath died.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So, to wait!&mdash;--But what notes down the wind, hark! are driving?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis he! 'tis their flag, shooting round by the trees!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Let my turn, if it <i>will</i> come, be swift in arriving!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah! hope cannot long lighten torments like these.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hast thou yet dealt him, O life, thy full measure?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">World, have thy children yet bow'd at his knee?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hast thou with myrtle-leaf crown'd him, O pleasure?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Crown, crown him quickly, and leave him for me!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="REQUIESCAT" id="REQUIESCAT"></a>REQUIESCAT</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Strew on her roses, roses,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">And never a spray of yew!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In quiet she reposes;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Ah, would that I did too!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Her mirth the world required;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">She bathed it in smiles of glee.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">But her heart was tired, tired,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">And now they let her be.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_22" id="Page_22">[22]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Her life was turning, turning,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">In mazes of heat and sound.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">But for peace her soul was yearning,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">And now peace laps her round.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Her cabin'd, ample spirit,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">It flutter'd and fail'd for breath.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">To-night it doth inherit<br /></span>
<span class="i6">The vasty hall of death.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="YOUTH_AND_CALM" id="YOUTH_AND_CALM"></a>YOUTH AND CALM</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">'Tis death! and peace, indeed, is here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And ease from shame, and rest from fear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There's nothing can dismarble now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The smoothness of that limpid brow.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But is a calm like this, in truth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The crowning end of life and youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And when this boon rewards the dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are all debts paid, has all been said?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And is the heart of youth so light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Its step so firm, its eyes so bright,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because on its hot brow there blows<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A wind of promise and repose<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the far grave, to which it goes;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because it hath the hope to come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One day, to harbour in the tomb?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah no, the bliss youth dreams is one<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For daylight, for the cheerful sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For feeling nerves and living breath&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Youth dreams a bliss on this side death.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_23" id="Page_23">[23]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">It dreams a rest, if not more deep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More grateful than this marble sleep;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It hears a voice within it tell:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Calm's not life's crown, though calm is well.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis all perhaps which man acquires,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But 'tis not what our youth desires.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="A_MEMORY-PICTURE" id="A_MEMORY-PICTURE"></a>A MEMORY-PICTURE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Laugh, my friends, and without blame<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lightly quit what lightly came;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rich to-morrow as to-day,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Spend as madly as you may!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I, with little land to stir,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Am the exacter labourer.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ere the parting hour go by,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Once I said: "A face is gone<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If too hotly mused upon;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And our best impressions are<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Those that do themselves repair."<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Many a face I so let flee,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah! is faded utterly.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ere the parting hour go by,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Marguerite says: "As last year went,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So the coming year'll be spent;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some day next year, I shall be,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Entering heedless, kiss'd by thee."<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, I hope!&mdash;yet, once away,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What may chain us, who can say?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_24" id="Page_24">[24]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ere the parting hour go by,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Paint that lilac kerchief, bound<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Her soft face, her hair around;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tied under the archest chin<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mockery ever ambush'd in.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let the fluttering fringes streak<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All her pale, sweet-rounded cheek.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ere the parting hour go by,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Paint that figure's pliant grace<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As she tow'rd me lean'd her face,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Half refused and half resign'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Murmuring: "Art thou still unkind?"<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Many a broken promise then<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Was new made&mdash;to break again.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ere the parting hour go by,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Paint those eyes, so blue, so kind,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Eager tell-tales of her mind;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Paint, with their impetuous stress<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of inquiring tenderness,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Those frank eyes, where deep I see<br /></span>
<span class="i2">An angelic gravity.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ere the parting hour go by,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What, my friends, these feeble lines<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Show, you say, my love declines?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To paint ill as I have done,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Proves forgetfulness begun?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_25" id="Page_25">[25]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Time's gay minions, pleased you see,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Time, your master, governs me;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pleased, you mock the fruitless cry:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Quick, thy tablets, Memory!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah, too true! Time's current strong<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Leaves us fixt to nothing long.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet, if little stays with man,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, retain we all we can!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If the clear impression dies,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, the dim remembrance prize!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ere the parting hour go by,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="A_DREAM" id="A_DREAM"></a>A DREAM</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Was it a dream? We sail'd, I thought we sail'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Martin and I, down a green Alpine stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Border'd, each bank, with pines; the morning sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the wet umbrage of their glossy tops,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the red pinings of their forest-floor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Drew a warm scent abroad; behind the pines<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mountain-skirts, with all their sylvan change<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of bright-leaf'd chestnuts and moss'd walnut-trees<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the frail scarlet-berried ash, began.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swiss chalets glitter'd on the dewy slopes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from some swarded shelf, high up, there came<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Notes of wild pastoral music&mdash;over all<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ranged, diamond-bright, the eternal wall of snow.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the mossy rocks at the stream's edge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Back'd by the pines, a plank-built cottage stood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bright in the sun; the climbing gourd-plant's leaves<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Muffled its walls, and on the stone-strewn roof<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_26" id="Page_26">[26]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lay the warm golden gourds; golden, within,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the eaves, peer'd rows of Indian corn.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We shot beneath the cottage with the stream.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the brown, rude-carved balcony, two forms<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Came forth&mdash;Olivia's, Marguerite! and thine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clad were they both in white, flowers in their breast;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Straw hats bedeck'd their heads, with ribbons blue,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which danced, and on their shoulders, fluttering, play'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They saw us, they conferr'd; their bosoms heaved,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And more than mortal impulse fill'd their eyes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their lips moved; their white arms, waved eagerly,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flash'd once, like falling streams; we rose, we gazed.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One moment, on the rapid's top, our boat<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hung poised&mdash;and then the darting river of Life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(Such now, methought, it was), the river of Life,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Loud thundering, bore us by; swift, swift it foam'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Black under cliffs it raced, round headlands shone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soon the plank'd cottage by the sun-warm'd pines<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Faded&mdash;the moss&mdash;the rocks; us burning plains,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bristled with cities, us the sea received.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_NEW_SIRENS" id="THE_NEW_SIRENS"></a>THE NEW SIRENS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In the cedarn shadow sleeping,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where cool grass and fragrant glooms<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Forth at noon had lured me, creeping<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From your darken'd palace rooms&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I, who in your train at morning<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stroll'd and sang with joyful mind,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heard, in slumber, sounds of warning;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heard the hoarse boughs labour in the wind.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_27" id="Page_27">[27]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Who are they, O pensive Graces,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;For I dream'd they wore your forms&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who on shores and sea-wash'd places<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Scoop the shelves and fret the storms?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who, when ships are that way tending,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Troop across the flushing sands,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To all reefs and narrows wending,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With blown tresses, and with beckoning hands?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yet I see, the howling levels<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the deep are not your lair;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And your tragic-vaunted revels<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are less lonely than they were.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like those Kings with treasure steering<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the jewell'd lands of dawn,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Troops, with gold and gifts, appearing,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stream all day through your enchanted lawn.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And we too, from upland valleys,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where some Muse with half-curved frown<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Leans her ear to your mad sallies<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which the charm'd winds never drown;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By faint music guided, ranging<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The scared glens, we wander'd on,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Left our awful laurels hanging,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And came heap'd with myrtles to your throne.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">From the dragon-warder'd fountains<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where the springs of knowledge are,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the watchers on the mountains,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the bright and morning star;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We are exiles, we are falling,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We have lost them at your call<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_28" id="Page_28">[28]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O ye false ones, at your calling<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seeking ceiled chambers and a palace-hall!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Are the accents of your luring<br /></span>
<span class="i2">More melodious than of yore?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are those frail forms more enduring<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Than the charms Ulysses bore?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That we sought you with rejoicings,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Till at evening we descry<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At a pause of Siren voicings<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These vext branches and this howling sky?...<br /></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="poem2" />

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Oh, your pardon! The uncouthness<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of that primal age is gone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the skin of dazzling smoothness<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Screens not now a heart of stone.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Love has flush'd those cruel faces;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And those slacken'd arms forgo<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The delight of death-embraces,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And yon whitening bone-mounds do not grow.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Ah," you say; "the large appearance<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of man's labour is but vain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And we plead as staunch adherence<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Due to pleasure as to pain."<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pointing to earth's careworn creatures,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Come," you murmur with a sigh:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Ah! we own diviner features,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Loftier bearing, and a prouder eye.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Come," you say, "the hours were dreary;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dull did life in torpor fade;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_29" id="Page_29">[29]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Time is lame, and we grew weary<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the slumbrous cedarn shade.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Round our hearts with long caresses,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With low sighings, Silence stole,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And her load of steaming tresses<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fell, like Ossa, on the climbing soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Come," you say, "the soul is fainting<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Till she search and learn her own,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the wisdom of man's painting<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Leaves her riddle half unknown.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Come," you say, "the brain is seeking,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While the sovran heart is dead;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet this glean'd, when Gods were speaking,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rarer secrets than the toiling head.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Come," you say, "opinion trembles,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Judgment shifts, convictions go;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Life dries up, the heart dissembles&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only, what we feel, we know.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath your wisdom felt emotions?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Will it weep our burning tears?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath it drunk of our love-potions<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crowning moments with the wealth of years?"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">&mdash;I am dumb. Alas, too soon all<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man's grave reasons disappear!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet, I think, at God's tribunal<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some large answer you shall hear.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, for me, my thoughts are straying<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where at sunrise, through your vines,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On these lawns I saw you playing,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hanging garlands on your odorous pines;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_30" id="Page_30">[30]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">When your showering locks enwound you,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And your heavenly eyes shone through;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When the pine-boughs yielded round you,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And your brows were starr'd with dew;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And immortal forms, to meet you,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down the statued alleys came,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And through golden horns, to greet you,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Blew such music as a God may frame.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yes, I muse! And if the dawning<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Into daylight never grew,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If the glistering wings of morning<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the dry noon shook their dew,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If the fits of joy were longer,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or the day were sooner done,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or, perhaps, if hope were stronger,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No weak nursling of an earthly sun ...<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pluck, pluck cypress, O pale maidens,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Dusk the hall with yew!<br /></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="poem2" />

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For a bound was set to meetings,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the sombre day dragg'd on;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the burst of joyful greetings,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the joyful dawn, were gone.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For the eye grows fill'd with gazing,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And on raptures follow calms;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And those warm locks men were praising,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Droop'd, unbraided, on your listless arms.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Storms unsmooth'd your folded valleys,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And made all your cedars frown;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Leaves were whirling in the alleys<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which your lovers wander'd down.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_31" id="Page_31">[31]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Sitting cheerless in your bowers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The hands propping the sunk head,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still they gall you, the long hours,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the hungry thought, that must be fed!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Is the pleasure that is tasted<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Patient of a long review?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Will the fire joy hath wasted,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mused on, warm the heart anew?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Or, are those old thoughts returning,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Guests the dull sense never knew,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stars, set deep, yet inly burning,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Germs, your untrimm'd passion overgrew?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Once, like us, you took your station<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Watchers for a purer fire;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But you droop'd in expectation,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And you wearied in desire.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When the first rose flush was steeping<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All the frore peak's awful crown,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shepherds say, they found you sleeping<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In some windless valley, farther down.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Then you wept, and slowly raising<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Your dozed eyelids, sought again,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Half in doubt, they say, and gazing<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sadly back, the seats of men;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Snatch'd a turbid inspiration<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From some transient earthly sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And proclaim'd your vain ovation<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For those mimic raptures you had won....<br /></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="poem2" />

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_32" id="Page_32">[32]</a></span></span>
<span class="i2">With a sad, majestic motion,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With a stately, slow surprise,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From their earthward-bound devotion<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lifting up your languid eyes&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Would you freeze my too loud boldness,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dumbly smiling as you go,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">One faint frown of distant coldness<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Flitting fast across each marble brow?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Do I brighten at your sorrow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O sweet Pleaders?&mdash;doth my lot<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Find assurance in to-morrow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of one joy, which you have not?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O, speak once, and shame my sadness!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let this sobbing, Phrygian strain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mock'd and baffled by your gladness,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mar the music of your feasts in vain!<br /></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="poem2" />

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Scent, and song, and light, and flowers!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gust on gust, the harsh winds blow&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Come, bind up those ringlet showers!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Roses for that dreaming brow!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Come, once more that ancient lightness,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Glancing feet, and eager eyes!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let your broad lamps flash the brightness<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which the sorrow-stricken day denies!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Through black depths of serried shadows,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Up cold aisles of buried glade;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the midst of river-meadows<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where the looming kine are laid;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From your dazzled windows streaming,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From your humming festal room,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_33" id="Page_33">[33]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deep and far, a broken gleaming<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Reels and shivers on the ruffled gloom.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Where I stand, the grass is glowing;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Doubtless you are passing fair!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But I hear the north wind blowing,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And I feel the cold night-air.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can I look on your sweet faces,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And your proud heads backward thrown,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From this dusk of leaf-strewn places<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With the dumb woods and the night alone?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yet, indeed, this flux of guesses&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mad delight, and frozen calms&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mirth to-day and vine-bound tresses,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And to-morrow&mdash;folded palms;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is this all? this balanced measure?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Could life run no happier way?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Joyous, at the height of pleasure,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Passive at the nadir of dismay?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But, indeed, this proud possession,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This far-reaching, magic chain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Linking in a mad succession<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fits of joy and fits of pain&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have you seen it at the closing?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have you track'd its clouded ways?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can your eyes, while fools are dozing,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Drop, with mine, adown life's latter days?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">When a dreary dawn is wading<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through this waste of sunless greens,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When the flushing hues are fading<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the peerless cheek of queens;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_34" id="Page_34">[34]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">When the mean shall no more sorrow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the proudest no more smile;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As old age, youth's fatal morrow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Spreads its cold light wider all that while?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Then, when change itself is over,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When the slow tide sets one way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shall you find the radiant lover,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Even by moments, of to-day?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The eye wanders, faith is failing&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O, loose hands, and let it be!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Proudly, like a king bewailing,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O, let fall one tear, and set us free!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">All true speech and large avowal<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which the jealous soul concedes;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All man's heart which brooks bestowal,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All frank faith which passion breeds&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These we had, and we gave truly;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Doubt not, what we had, we gave!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">False we were not, nor unruly;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lodgers in the forest and the cave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Long we wander'd with you, feeding<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our rapt souls on your replies,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In a wistful silence reading<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All the meaning of your eyes.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By moss-border'd statues sitting,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By well-heads, in summer days.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But we turn, our eyes are flitting&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See, the white east, and the morning rays!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And you too, O worshipp'd Graces,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sylvan Gods of this fair shade!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_35" id="Page_35">[35]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is there doubt on divine faces?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are the blessed Gods dismay'd?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can men worship the wan features,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The sunk eyes, the wailing tone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of unsphered, discrowned creatures,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Souls as little godlike as their own?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Come, loose hands! The winged fleetness<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of immortal feet is gone;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And your scents have shed their sweetness,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And your flowers are overblown.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And your jewell'd gauds surrender<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Half their glories to the day;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Freely did they flash their splendour,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Freely gave it&mdash;but it dies away.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In the pines the thrush is waking&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lo, yon orient hill in flames!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Scores of true love knots are breaking<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At divorce which it proclaims.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When the lamps are paled at morning,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heart quits heart and hand quits hand.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cold in that unlovely dawning,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Loveless, rayless, joyless you shall stand!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Pluck no more red roses, maidens,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Leave the lilies in their dew&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pluck, pluck cypress, O pale maidens,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dusk, oh, dusk the hall with yew!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Shall I seek, that I may scorn her,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Her I loved at eventide?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shall I ask, what faded mourner<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stands, at daybreak, weeping by my side?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pluck, pluck cypress, O pale maidens!<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Dusk the hall with yew!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_36" id="Page_36">[36]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="THE_VOICE" id="THE_VOICE"></a>THE VOICE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">As the kindling glances,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Queen-like and clear,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Which the bright moon lances<br /></span>
<span class="i6">From her tranquil sphere<br /></span>
<span class="i4">At the sleepless waters<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Of a lonely mere,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the wild whirling waves, mournfully, mournfully,<br /></span>
<span class="i8">Shiver and die.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">As the tears of sorrow<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Mothers have shed&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Prayers that to-morrow<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Shall in vain be sped<br /></span>
<span class="i4">When the flower they flow for<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Lies frozen and dead&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fall on the throbbing brow, fall on the burning breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i8">Bringing no rest.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i5">Like bright waves that fall<br /></span>
<span class="i5">With a lifelike motion<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the lifeless margin of the sparkling Ocean;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A wild rose climbing up a mouldering wall&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A gush of sunbeams through a ruin'd hall&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Strains of glad music at a funeral&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So sad, and with so wild a start<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To this deep-sober'd heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So anxiously and painfully,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So drearily and doubtfully,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And oh, with such intolerable change<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of thought, such contrast strange,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_37" id="Page_37">[37]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">O unforgotten voice, thy accents come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like wanderers from the world's extremity,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unto their ancient home!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In vain, all, all in vain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They beat upon mine ear again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Those melancholy tones so sweet and still.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Those lute-like tones which in the bygone year<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Did steal into mine ear&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blew such a thrilling summons to my will,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet could not shake it;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Made my tost heart its very life-blood spill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet could not break it.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="YOUTHS_AGITATIONS" id="YOUTHS_AGITATIONS"></a>YOUTH'S AGITATIONS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">When I shall be divorced, some ten years hence,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From this poor present self which I am now;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When youth has done its tedious vain expense<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of passions that for ever ebb and flow;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Shall I not joy youth's heats are left behind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And breathe more happy in an even clime?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah no, for then I shall begin to find<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A thousand virtues in this hated time!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then I shall wish its agitations back,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all its thwarting currents of desire;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then I shall praise the heat which then I lack,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And call this hurrying fever, generous fire;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And sigh that one thing only has been lent<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To youth and age in common&mdash;discontent.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_38" id="Page_38">[38]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="THE_WORLDS_TRIUMPHS" id="THE_WORLDS_TRIUMPHS"></a>THE WORLD'S TRIUMPHS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So far as I conceive the world's rebuke<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To him address'd who would recast her new,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not from herself her fame of strength she took,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But from their weakness who would work her rue.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Behold," she cries, "so many rages lull'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So many fiery spirits quite cool'd down;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Look how so many valours, long undull'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">After short commerce with me, fear my frown!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Thou too, when thou against my crimes wouldst cry,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let thy foreboded homage check thy tongue!"&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The world speaks well; yet might her foe reply:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Are wills so weak?&mdash;then let not mine wait long!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Hast thou so rare a poison?&mdash;let me be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Keener to slay thee, lest thou poison me!"<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="STAGIRIUS3" id="STAGIRIUS3"></a>STAGIRIUS<a name="FNanchor_3_5" id="FNanchor_3_5"></a><a href="#Footnote_3_5" class="fnanchor">[3]</a></h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Thou, who dost dwell alone&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou, who dost know thine own&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou, to whom all are known<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the cradle to the grave&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Save, oh! save.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the world's temptations,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">From tribulations,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From that fierce anguish<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wherein we languish,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_39" id="Page_39">[39]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i6">From that torpor deep<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Wherein we lie asleep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Heavy as death, cold as the grave,<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Save, oh! save.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6">When the soul, growing clearer,<br /></span>
<span class="i8">Sees God no nearer;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">When the soul, mounting higher,<br /></span>
<span class="i8">To God comes no nigher;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">But the arch-fiend Pride<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Mounts at her side,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Foiling her high emprise,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Sealing her eagle eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">And, when she fain would soar,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Makes idols to adore,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Changing the pure emotion<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Of her high devotion,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">To a skin-deep sense<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Of her own eloquence;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Strong to deceive, strong to enslave&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Save, oh! save.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6">From the ingrain'd fashion<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Of this earthly nature<br /></span>
<span class="i6">That mars thy creature;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">From grief that is but passion,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">From mirth that is but feigning,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">From tears that bring no healing,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">From wild and weak complaining,<br /></span>
<span class="i8">Thine old strength revealing,<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Save, oh! save.<br /></span>
<span class="i6">From doubt, where all is double;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Where wise men are not strong,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Where comfort turns to trouble,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_40" id="Page_40">[40]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i6">Where just men suffer wrong;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Where sorrow treads on joy,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Where sweet things soonest cloy,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Where faiths are built on dust,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Where love is half mistrust,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hungry, and barren, and sharp as the sea&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Oh! set us free.<br /></span>
<span class="i6">O let the false dream fly,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Where our sick souls do lie<br /></span>
<span class="i8">Tossing continually!<br /></span>
<span class="i10">O where thy voice doth come<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Let all doubts be dumb,<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Let all words be mild,<br /></span>
<span class="i12">All strifes be reconciled,<br /></span>
<span class="i12">All pains beguiled!<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Light bring no blindness,<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Love no unkindness,<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Knowledge no ruin,<br /></span>
<span class="i12">Fear no undoing!<br /></span>
<span class="i12">From the cradle to the grave,<br /></span>
<span class="i16">Save, oh! save.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="HUMAN_LIFE" id="HUMAN_LIFE"></a>HUMAN LIFE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What mortal, when he saw,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Life's voyage done, his heavenly Friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Could ever yet dare tell him fearlessly:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"I have kept uninfringed my nature's law;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The inly-written chart thou gavest me,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To guide me, I have steer'd by to the end"?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah! let us make no claim,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On life's incognisable sea,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_41" id="Page_41">[41]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">To too exact a steering of our way;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let us not fret and fear to miss our aim,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If some fair coast have lured us to make stay,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or some friend hail'd us to keep company.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ay! we would each fain drive<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At random, and not steer by rule.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Weakness! and worse, weakness bestow'd in vain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Winds from our side the unsuiting consort rive,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We rush by coasts where we had lief remain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man cannot, though he would, live chance's fool.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">No! as the foaming swath<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of torn-up water, on the main,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Falls heavily away with long-drawn roar<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On either side the black deep-furrow'd path<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cut by an onward-labouring vessel's prore,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And never touches the ship-side again;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Even so we leave behind,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As, charter'd by some unknown Powers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We stem across the sea of life by night,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The joys which were not for our use design'd;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The friends to whom we had no natural right,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The homes that were not destined to be ours.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="TO_A_GIPSY_CHILD_BY_THE_SEA-SHORE" id="TO_A_GIPSY_CHILD_BY_THE_SEA-SHORE"></a>TO A GIPSY CHILD BY THE SEA-SHORE</h2>

<h3>DOUGLAS, ISLE OF MAN</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Who taught this pleading to unpractised eyes?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who hid such import in an infant's gloom?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who lent thee, child, this meditative guise?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who mass'd, round that slight brow, these clouds of doom?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_42" id="Page_42">[42]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Lo! sails that gleam a moment and are gone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The swinging waters, and the cluster'd pier.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not idly Earth and Ocean labour on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor idly do these sea-birds hover near.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But thou, whom superfluity of joy<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wafts not from thine own thoughts, nor longings vain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor weariness, the full-fed soul's annoy&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Remaining in thy hunger and thy pain;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou, drugging pain by patience; half averse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From thine own mother's breast, that knows not thee;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With eyes which sought thine eyes thou didst converse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that soul-searching vision fell on me.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Glooms that go deep as thine I have not known:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Moods of fantastic sadness, nothing worth.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy sorrow and thy calmness are thine own:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Glooms that enhance and glorify this earth.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What mood wears like complexion to thy woe?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His, who in mountain glens, at noon of day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sits rapt, and hears the battle break below?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Ah! thine was not the shelter, but the fray.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Some exile's, mindful how the past was glad?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some angel's, in an alien planet born?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;No exile's dream was ever half so sad,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor any angel's sorrow so forlorn.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Is the calm thine of stoic souls, who weigh<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Life well, and find it wanting, nor deplore;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But in disdainful silence turn away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stand mute, self-centred, stern, and dream no more?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_43" id="Page_43">[43]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Or do I wait, to hear some gray-hair'd king<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unravel all his many-colour'd lore;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose mind hath known all arts of governing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mused much, loved life a little, loathed it more?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Down the pale cheek long lines of shadow slope,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which years, and curious thought, and suffering give.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Thou hast foreknown the vanity of hope,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Foreseen thy harvest&mdash;yet proceed'st to live.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O meek anticipant of that sure pain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose sureness gray-hair'd scholars hardly learn!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What wonder shall time breed, to swell thy strain?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What heavens, what earth, what sun shalt thou discern?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ere the long night, whose stillness brooks no star,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Match that funereal aspect with her pall,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I think, thou wilt have fathom'd life too far,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have known too much&mdash;&mdash;or else forgotten all.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The Guide of our dark steps a triple veil<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Betwixt our senses and our sorrow keeps;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hath sown with cloudless passages the tale<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of grief, and eased us with a thousand sleeps.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah! not the nectarous poppy lovers use,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not daily labour's dull, Leth&aelig;an spring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oblivion in lost angels can infuse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the soil'd glory, and the trailing wing.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And though thou glean, what strenuous gleaners may,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the throng'd fields where winning comes by strife;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And though the just sun gild, as mortals pray,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some reaches of thy storm-vext stream of life;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_44" id="Page_44">[44]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though that blank sunshine blind thee; though the cloud<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That sever'd the world's march and thine, be gone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though ease dulls grace, and Wisdom be too proud<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To halve a lodging that was all her own&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Once, ere the day decline, thou shalt discern,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oh once, ere night, in thy success, thy chain!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ere the long evening close, thou shalt return,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wear this majesty of grief again.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="A_QUESTION" id="A_QUESTION"></a>A QUESTION</h2>

<h3>TO FAUSTA</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Joy comes and goes, hope ebbs and flows<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Like the wave;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Change doth unknit the tranquil strength of men.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Love lends life a little grace,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A few sad smiles; and then,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Both are laid in one cold place,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In the grave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Dreams dawn and fly, friends smile and die<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Like spring flowers;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our vaunted life is one long funeral.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Men dig graves with bitter tears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For their dead hopes; and all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mazed with doubts and sick with fears,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Count the hours.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We count the hours! These dreams of ours,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">False and hollow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do we go hence and find they are not dead?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_45" id="Page_45">[45]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Joys we dimly apprehend,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Faces that smiled and fled,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hopes born here, and born to end,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Shall we follow?<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="IN_UTRUMQUE_PARATUS" id="IN_UTRUMQUE_PARATUS"></a>IN UTRUMQUE PARATUS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">If, in the silent mind of One all-pure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At first imagined lay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sacred world; and by procession sure<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From those still deeps, in form and colour drest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seasons alternating, and night and day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The long-mused thought to north, south, east, and west,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Took then its all-seen way;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O waking on a world which thus-wise springs!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whether it needs thee count<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Betwixt thy waking and the birth of things<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ages or hours&mdash;O waking on life's stream!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By lonely pureness to the all-pure fount<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(Only by this thou canst) the colour'd dream<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of life remount!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thin, thin the pleasant human noises grow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And faint the city gleams;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rare the lone pastoral huts&mdash;marvel not thou!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The solemn peaks but to the stars are known,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But to the stars, and the cold lunar beams;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alone the sun arises, and alone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Spring the great streams.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But, if the wild unfather'd mass no birth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In divine seats hath known;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_46" id="Page_46">[46]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the blank, echoing solitude if Earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rocking her obscure body to and fro,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ceases not from all time to heave and groan,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unfruitful oft, and at her happiest throe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forms, what she forms, alone;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O seeming sole to awake, thy sun-bathed head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Piercing the solemn cloud<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Round thy still dreaming brother-world outspread!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O man, whom Earth, thy long-vext mother, bare<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not without joy&mdash;so radiant, so endow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(Such happy issue crown'd her painful care)&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be not too proud!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Oh when most self-exalted most alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Chief dreamer, own thy dream!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy brother-world stirs at thy feet unknown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who hath a monarch's hath no brother's part;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet doth thine inmost soul with yearning teem.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Oh, what a spasm shakes the dreamer's heart!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"<i>I, too, but seem.</i>"<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_WORLD_AND_THE_QUIETIST" id="THE_WORLD_AND_THE_QUIETIST"></a>THE WORLD AND THE QUIETIST</h2>

<h3>TO CRITIAS</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Why, when the world's great mind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath finally inclined,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why," you say, Critias, "be debating still?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Why, with these mournful rhymes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Learn'd in more languid climes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Blame our activity<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who, with such passionate will,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are what we mean to be?"<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_47" id="Page_47">[47]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Critias, long since, I know<br /></span>
<span class="i2">(For Fate decreed it so),<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Long since the world hath set its heart to live;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Long since, with credulous zeal<br /></span>
<span class="i4">It turns life's mighty wheel,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still doth for labourers send<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Who still their labour give,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And still expects an end.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yet, as the wheel flies round,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With no ungrateful sound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do adverse voices fall on the world's ear.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deafen'd by his own stir<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The rugged labourer<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Caught not till then a sense<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So glowing and so near<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Of his omnipotence.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">So, when the feast grew loud<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In Susa's palace proud,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A white-robed slave stole to the Great King's side.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He spake&mdash;the Great King heard;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Felt the slow-rolling word<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Swell his attentive soul;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Breathed deeply as it died,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And drain'd his mighty bowl.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="HORATIAN_ECHO4" id="HORATIAN_ECHO4"></a>HORATIAN ECHO<a name="FNanchor_4_6" id="FNanchor_4_6"></a><a href="#Footnote_4_6" class="fnanchor">[4]</a></h2>

<h3>(TO AN AMBITIOUS FRIEND)</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Omit, omit, my simple friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still to enquire how parties tend,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_48" id="Page_48">[48]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or what we fix with foreign powers.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If France and we are really friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And what the Russian Czar intends,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Is no concern of ours.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Us not the daily quickening race<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the invading populace<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shall draw to swell that shouldering herd.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mourn will we not your closing hour,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ye imbeciles in present power,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Doom'd, pompous, and absurd!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And let us bear, that they debate<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of all the engine-work of state,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of commerce, laws, and policy,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The secrets of the world's machine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And what the rights of man may mean,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">With readier tongue than we.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Only, that with no finer art<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They cloak the troubles of the heart<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With pleasant smile, let us take care;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor with a lighter hand dispose<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fresh garlands of this dewy rose,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">To crown Eugenia's hair.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Of little threads our life is spun,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And he spins ill, who misses one.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But is thy fair Eugenia cold?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet Helen had an equal grace,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And Juliet's was as fair a face,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">And now their years are told.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The day approaches, when we must<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Be crumbling bones and windy dust;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_49" id="Page_49">[49]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">And scorn us as our mistress may,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Her beauty will no better be<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Than the poor face she slights in thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">When dawns that day, that day.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_SECOND_BEST" id="THE_SECOND_BEST"></a>THE SECOND BEST</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Moderate tasks and moderate leisure,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quiet living, strict-kept measure<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Both in suffering and in pleasure&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">'Tis for this thy nature yearns.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But so many books thou readest,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But so many schemes thou breedest,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But so many wishes feedest,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">That thy poor head almost turns.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And (the world's so madly jangled,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Human things so fast entangled)<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nature's wish must now be strangled<br /></span>
<span class="i4">For that best which she discerns.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">So it <i>must</i> be! yet, while leading<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A strain'd life, while overfeeding,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like the rest, his wit with reading,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">No small profit that man earns,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Who through all he meets can steer him,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can reject what cannot clear him,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cling to what can truly cheer him;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Who each day more surely learns<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">That an impulse, from the distance<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of his deepest, best existence,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the words, "Hope, Light, Persistence,"<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Strongly sets and truly burns.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_50" id="Page_50">[50]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="CONSOLATION" id="CONSOLATION"></a>CONSOLATION</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Mist clogs the sunshine.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Smoky dwarf houses<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Hem me round everywhere;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">A vague dejection<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Weighs down my soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Yet, while I languish,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Everywhere countless<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Prospects unroll themselves,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And countless beings<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Pass countless moods.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Far hence, in Asia,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">On the smooth convent-roofs,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">On the gilt terraces,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Of holy Lassa,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Bright shines the sun.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Grey time-worn marbles<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Hold the pure Muses;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In their cool gallery,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">By yellow Tiber,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">They still look fair.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Strange unloved uproar<a name="FNanchor_A_1" id="FNanchor_A_1"></a><a href="#Footnote_A_1" class="fnanchor">[A]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i4">Shrills round their portal;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Yet not on Helicon<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Kept they more cloudless<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Their noble calm.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Through sun-proof alleys<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In a lone, sand-hemm'd<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_51" id="Page_51">[51]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i4">City of Africa,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">A blind, led beggar,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Age-bow'd, asks alms.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">No bolder robber<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Erst abode ambush'd<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Deep in the sandy waste;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">No clearer eyesight<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Spied prey afar.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Saharan sand-winds<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Sear'd his keen eyeballs;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Spent is the spoil he won.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">For him the present<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Holds only pain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Two young, fair lovers,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Where the warm June-wind,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Fresh from the summer fields<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Plays fondly round them,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Stand, tranced in joy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">With sweet, join'd voices,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And with eyes brimming:<br /></span>
<span class="i4">"Ah," they cry, "Destiny,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Prolong the present!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Time, stand still here!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">The prompt stern Goddess<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Shakes her head, frowning;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Time gives his hour-glass<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Its due reversal;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Their hour is gone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">With weak indulgence<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Did the just Goddess<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_52" id="Page_52">[52]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i4">Lengthen their happiness,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">She lengthen'd also<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Distress elsewhere.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">The hour, whose happy<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Unalloy'd moments<br /></span>
<span class="i4">I would eternalise,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ten thousand mourners<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Well pleased see end.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">The bleak, stern hour,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Whose severe moments<br /></span>
<span class="i4">I would annihilate,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Is pass'd by others<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In warmth, light, joy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Time, so complain'd of,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Who to no one man<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Shows partiality,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Brings round to all men<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Some undimm'd hours.<br /></span>
</div></div>

<div class="footnotes"><h3>FOOTNOTE:</h3>
<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_A_1" id="Footnote_A_1"></a><a href="#FNanchor_A_1"><span class="label">[A]</span></a> Written during the siege of Rome by the French, 1849.</p></div>
</div>


<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="RESIGNATION" id="RESIGNATION"></a>RESIGNATION</h2>

<h3>TO FAUSTA</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2"><i>To die be given us, or attain!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Fierce work it were, to do again.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">So pilgrims, bound for Mecca, pray'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At burning noon; so warriors said,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Scarf'd with the cross, who watch'd the miles<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of dust which wreathed their struggling files<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down Lydian mountains; so, when snows<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_53" id="Page_53">[53]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Round Alpine summits, eddying, rose,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Goth, bound Rome-wards; so the Hun,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crouch'd on his saddle, while the sun<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Went lurid down o'er flooded plains<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through which the groaning Danube strains<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the drear Euxine;&mdash;so pray all,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whom labours, self-ordain'd, enthrall;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Because they to themselves propose<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On this side the all-common close<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A goal which, gain'd, may give repose.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So pray they; and to stand again<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where they stood once, to them were pain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pain to thread back and to renew<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Past straits, and currents long steer'd through.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But milder natures, and more free&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whom an unblamed serenity<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath freed from passions, and the state<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of struggle these necessitate;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whom schooling of the stubborn mind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath made, or birth hath found, resign'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These mourn not, that their goings pay<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Obedience to the passing day.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These claim not every laughing Hour<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For handmaid to their striding power;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Each in her turn, with torch uprear'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To await their march; and when appear'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through the cold gloom, with measured race,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To usher for a destined space<br /></span>
<span class="i2">(Her own sweet errands all forgone)<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The too imperious traveller on.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These, Fausta, ask not this; nor thou,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Time's chafing prisoner, ask it now!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_54" id="Page_54">[54]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">We left, just ten years since, you say,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That wayside inn we left to-day.<a name="FNanchor_5_7" id="FNanchor_5_7"></a><a href="#Footnote_5_7" class="fnanchor">[5]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our jovial host, as forth we fare,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shouts greeting from his easy chair.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">High on a bank our leader stands,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Reviews and ranks his motley bands,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Makes clear our goal to every eye&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The valley's western boundary.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A gate swings to! our tide hath flow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Already from the silent road.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The valley-pastures, one by one,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are threaded, quiet in the sun;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And now beyond the rude stone bridge<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Slopes gracious up the western ridge.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its woody border, and the last<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of its dark upland farms is past&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cool farms, with open-lying stores,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Under their burnish'd sycamores;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All past! and through the trees we glide,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Emerging on the green hill-side.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There climbing hangs, a far-seen sign,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our wavering, many-colour'd line;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There winds, upstreaming slowly still<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Over the summit of the hill.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And now, in front, behold outspread<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Those upper regions we must tread!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mild hollows, and clear heathy swells,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The cheerful silence of the fells.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some two hours' march with serious air,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through the deep noontide heats we fare;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The red-grouse, springing at our sound,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Skims, now and then, the shining ground;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No life, save his and ours, intrudes<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_55" id="Page_55">[55]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Upon these breathless solitudes.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O joy! again the farms appear.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cool shade is there, and rustic cheer;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There springs the brook will guide us down,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bright comrade, to the noisy town.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lingering, we follow down; we gain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The town, the highway, and the plain.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And many a mile of dusty way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Parch'd and road-worn, we made that day;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, Fausta, I remember well,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That as the balmy darkness fell<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We bathed our hands with speechless glee,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That night, in the wide-glimmering sea.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Once more we tread this self-same road,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fausta, which ten years since we trod;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Alone we tread it, you and I,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ghosts of that boisterous company.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here, where the brook shines, near its head,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In its clear, shallow, turf-fringed bed;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here, whence the eye first sees, far down,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Capp'd with faint smoke, the noisy town;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here sit we, and again unroll,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though slowly, the familiar whole.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The solemn wastes of heathy hill<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sleep in the July sunshine still;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The self-same shadows now, as then,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Play through this grassy upland glen;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The loose dark stones on the green way<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lie strewn, it seems, where then they lay;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On this mild bank above the stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">(You crush them!) the blue gentians gleam.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_56" id="Page_56">[56]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still this wild brook, the rushes cool,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The sailing foam, the shining pool!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These are not changed; and we, you say,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are scarce more changed, in truth, than they.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The gipsies, whom we met below,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They, too, have long roam'd to and fro;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They ramble, leaving, where they pass,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their fragments on the cumber'd grass.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And often to some kindly place<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Chance guides the migratory race,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where, though long wanderings intervene,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They recognise a former scene.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The dingy tents are pitch'd; the fires<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Give to the wind their wavering spires;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In dark knots crouch round the wild flame<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their children, as when first they came;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They see their shackled beasts again<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Move, browsing, up the gray-wall'd lane.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Signs are not wanting, which might raise<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The ghost in them of former days&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Signs are not wanting, if they would;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Suggestions to disquietude.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For them, for all, time's busy touch,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While it mends little, troubles much.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their joints grow stiffer&mdash;but the year<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Runs his old round of dubious cheer;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Chilly they grow&mdash;yet winds in March,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still, sharp as ever, freeze and parch;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They must live still&mdash;and yet, God knows,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crowded and keen the country grows;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It seems as if, in their decay,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The law grew stronger every day.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_57" id="Page_57">[57]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">So might they reason, so compare,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fausta, times past with times that are.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But no!&mdash;they rubb'd through yesterday<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In their hereditary way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And they will rub through, if they can,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To-morrow on the self-same plan,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Till death arrive to supersede,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For them, vicissitude and need.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The poet, to whose mighty heart<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heaven doth a quicker pulse impart,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Subdues that energy to scan<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not his own course, but that of man.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though he move mountains, though his day<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Be pass'd on the proud heights of sway,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though he hath loosed a thousand chains,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though he hath borne immortal pains,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Action and suffering though he know&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He hath not lived, if he lives so.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He sees, in some great-historied land,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A ruler of the people stand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sees his strong thought in fiery flood<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Roll through the heaving multitude<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Exults&mdash;yet for no moment's space<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Envies the all-regarded place.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beautiful eyes meet his&mdash;and he<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bears to admire uncravingly;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They pass&mdash;he, mingled with the crowd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is in their far-off triumphs proud.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From some high station he looks down,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At sunset, on a populous town;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Surveys each happy group, which fleets,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Toil ended, through the shining streets,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_58" id="Page_58">[58]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Each with some errand of its own&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And does not say: <i>I am alone.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">He sees the gentle stir of birth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When morning purifies the earth;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He leans upon a gate and sees<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The pastures, and the quiet trees.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Low, woody hill, with gracious bound,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Folds the still valley almost round;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The cuckoo, loud on some high lawn,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is answer'd from the depth of dawn;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the hedge straggling to the stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pale, dew-drench'd, half-shut roses gleam;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, where the farther side slopes down,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He sees the drowsy new-waked clown<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In his white quaint-embroider'd frock<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Make, whistling, tow'rd his mist-wreathed flock&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Slowly, behind his heavy tread,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The wet, flower'd grass heaves up its head.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lean'd on his gate, he gazes&mdash;tears<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are in his eyes, and in his ears<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The murmur of a thousand years.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Before him he sees life unroll,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A placid and continuous whole&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That general life, which does not cease,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose secret is not joy, but peace;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That life, whose dumb wish is not miss'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If birth proceeds, if things subsist;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The life of plants, and stones, and rain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The life he craves&mdash;if not in vain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fate gave, what chance shall not control,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His sad lucidity of soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">You listen&mdash;but that wandering smile,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_59" id="Page_59">[59]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fausta, betrays you cold the while!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Your eyes pursue the bells of foam<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wash'd, eddying, from this bank, their home.<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Those gipsies</i>, so your thoughts I scan,<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Are less, the poet more, than man.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>They feel not, though they move and see;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Deeper the poet feels; but he</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Breathes, when he will, immortal air,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Where Orpheus and where Homer are.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>In the day's life, whose iron round</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Hems us all in, he is not bound;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>He leaves his kind, o'erleaps their pen,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>And flees the common life of men.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>He escapes thence, but we abide&mdash;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Not deep the poet sees, but wide.</i><br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem2" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The world in which we live and move<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Outlasts aversion, outlasts love,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Outlasts each effort, interest, hope,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Remorse, grief, joy;&mdash;and were the scope<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of these affections wider made,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man still would see, and see dismay'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beyond his passion's widest range,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Far regions of eternal change.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nay, and since death, which wipes out man,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Finds him with many an unsolved plan,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With much unknown, and much untried,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wonder not dead, and thirst not dried,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still gazing on the ever full<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Eternal mundane spectacle&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This world in which we draw our breath,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In some sense, Fausta, outlasts death.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_60" id="Page_60">[60]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Blame thou not, therefore, him who dares<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Judge vain beforehand human cares;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose natural insight can discern<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What through experience others learn;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who needs not love and power, to know<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Love transient, power an unreal show;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who treads at ease life's uncheer'd ways&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Him blame not, Fausta, rather praise!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rather thyself for some aim pray<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nobler than this, to fill the day;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rather that heart, which burns in thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ask, not to amuse, but to set free;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Be passionate hopes not ill resign'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For quiet, and a fearless mind.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And though fate grudge to thee and me<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The poet's rapt security,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet they, believe me, who await<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No gifts from chance, have conquer'd fate.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They, winning room to see and hear,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And to men's business not too near,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through clouds of individual strife<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Draw homeward to the general life.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like leaves by suns not yet uncurl'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the wise, foolish; to the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Weak;&mdash;yet not weak, I might reply,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not foolish, Fausta, in His eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To whom each moment in its race,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crowd as we will its neutral space,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is but a quiet watershed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whence, equally, the seas of life and death are fed.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Enough, we live!&mdash;and if a life,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With large results so little rife,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_61" id="Page_61">[61]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though bearable, seem hardly worth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This pomp of worlds, this pain of birth;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet, Fausta, the mute turf we tread,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The solemn hills around us spread,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This stream which falls incessantly,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The strange-scrawl'd rocks, the lonely sky,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If I might lend their life a voice,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seem to bear rather than rejoice.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And even could the intemperate prayer<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man iterates, while these forbear,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For movement, for an ampler sphere,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pierce Fate's impenetrable ear;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not milder is the general lot<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Because our spirits have forgot,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In action's dizzying eddy whirl'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The something that infects the world.</span>
</div></div>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_62" id="Page_62">[62]</a></span></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_63" id="Page_63">[63]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<p><br /></p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_64" id="Page_64">[64]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="NARRATIVE_POEMS" id="NARRATIVE_POEMS"></a>NARRATIVE POEMS</h2>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_65" id="Page_65">[65]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="SOHRAB_AND_RUSTUM6" id="SOHRAB_AND_RUSTUM6"></a>SOHRAB AND RUSTUM<a name="FNanchor_6_8" id="FNanchor_6_8"></a><a href="#Footnote_6_8" class="fnanchor">[6]</a></h2>

<h3>AN EPISODE</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And the first grey of morning fill'd the east,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the fog rose out of the Oxus stream.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But all the Tartar camp along the stream<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was hush'd, and still the men were plunged in sleep;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sohrab alone, he slept not; all night long<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He had lain wakeful, tossing on his bed;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when the grey dawn stole into his tent,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He rose, and clad himself, and girt his sword,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And took his horseman's cloak, and left his tent,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And went abroad into the cold wet fog,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the dim camp to Peran-Wisa's tent.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the black Tartar tents he pass'd, which stood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clustering like bee-hives on the low flat strand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Oxus, where the summer-floods o'erflow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the sun melts the snows in high Pamere;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the black tents he pass'd, o'er that low strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to a hillock came, a little back<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the stream's brink&mdash;the spot where first a boat,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crossing the stream in summer, scrapes the land.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The men of former times had crown'd the top<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With a clay fort; but that was fall'n, and now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Tartars built there Peran-Wisa's tent,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_66" id="Page_66">[66]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">A dome of laths, and o'er it felts were spread.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Sohrab came there, and went in, and stood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the thick piled carpets in the tent,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And found the old man sleeping on his bed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of rugs and felts, and near him lay his arms.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Peran-Wisa heard him, though the step<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was dull'd; for he slept light, an old man's sleep;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he rose quickly on one arm, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Who art thou? for it is not yet clear dawn.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Speak! is there news, or any night alarm?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Sohrab came to the bedside, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Thou know'st me, Peran-Wisa! it is I.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sun is not yet risen, and the foe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sleep; but I sleep not; all night long I lie<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tossing and wakeful, and I come to thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For so did King Afrasiab bid me seek<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy counsel, and to heed thee as thy son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Samarcand, before the army march'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I will tell thee what my heart desires.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou know'st if, since from Ader-baijan first<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I came among the Tartars and bore arms,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I have still served Afrasiab well, and shown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At my boy's years, the courage of a man.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This too thou know'st, that while I still bear on<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The conquering Tartar ensigns through the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And beat the Persians back on every field,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I seek one man, one man, and one alone&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rustum, my father; who I hoped should greet,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Should one day greet, upon some well-fought field,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His not unworthy, not inglorious son.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So I long hoped, but him I never find.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come then, hear now, and grant me what I ask.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let the two armies rest to-day; but I<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_67" id="Page_67">[67]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will challenge forth the bravest Persian lords<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To meet me, man to man; if I prevail,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rustum will surely hear it; if I fall&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Old man, the dead need no one, claim no kin.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dim is the rumour of a common fight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where host meets host, and many names are sunk;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But of a single combat fame speaks clear."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; and Peran-Wisa took the hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the young man in his, and sigh'd, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"O Sohrab, an unquiet heart is thine!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Canst thou not rest among the Tartar chiefs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And share the battle's common chance with us<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who love thee, but must press for ever first,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In single fight incurring single risk,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To find a father thou hast never seen?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That were far best, my son, to stay with us<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unmurmuring; in our tents, while it is war,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And when 'tis truce, then in Afrasiab's towns.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, if this one desire indeed rules all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To seek out Rustum&mdash;seek him not through fight!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seek him in peace, and carry to his arms,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Sohrab, carry an unwounded son!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But far hence seek him, for he is not here.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For now it is not as when I was young,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When Rustum was in front of every fray;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But now he keeps apart, and sits at home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Seistan, with Zal, his father old.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whether that his own mighty strength at last<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Feels the abhorr'd approaches of old age,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or in some quarrel with the Persian King.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There go!&mdash;Thou wilt not? Yet my heart forebodes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Danger or death awaits thee on this field.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fain would I know thee safe and well, though lost<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_68" id="Page_68">[68]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">To us; fain therefore send thee hence, in peace<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To seek thy father, not seek single fights<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In vain;&mdash;but who can keep the lion's cub<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From ravening, and who govern Rustum's son?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Go, I will grant thee what thy heart desires."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So said he, and dropp'd Sohrab's hand, and left<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His bed, and the warm rugs whereon he lay;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And o'er his chilly limbs his woollen coat<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He pass'd, and tied his sandals on his feet,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And threw a white cloak round him, and he took<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In his right hand a ruler's staff, no sword;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on his head he set his sheep-skin cap,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Black, glossy, curl'd, the fleece of Kara-Kul;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And raised the curtain of his tent, and call'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His herald to his side, and went abroad.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sun by this had risen, and clear'd the fog<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the broad Oxus and the glittering sands.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from their tents the Tartar horsemen filed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the open plain; so Haman bade&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Haman, who next to Peran-Wisa ruled<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The host, and still was in his lusty prime.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From their black tents, long files of horse, they stream'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As when some grey November morn the files,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In marching order spread, of long-neck'd cranes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stream over Casbin and the southern slopes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Elburz, from the Aralian estuaries,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or some frore Caspian reed-bed, southward bound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the warm Persian sea-board&mdash;so they stream'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Tartars of the Oxus, the King's guard,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First, with black sheep-skin caps and with long spears;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Large men, large steeds; who from Bokhara come<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Khiva, and ferment the milk of mares.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Next, the more temperate Toorkmuns of the south,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_69" id="Page_69">[69]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Tukas, and the lances of Salore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And those from Attruck and the Caspian sands;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Light men and on light steeds, who only drink<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The acrid milk of camels, and their wells.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then a swarm of wandering horse, who came<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From far, and a more doubtful service own'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Tartars of Ferghana, from the banks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the Jaxartes, men with scanty beards<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And close-set skull-caps; and those wilder hordes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who roam o'er Kipchak and the northern waste,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Kalmucks and unkempt Kuzzaks, tribes who stray<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nearest the Pole, and wandering Kirghizzes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who come on shaggy ponies from Pamere;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These all filed out from camp into the plain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the other side the Persians form'd;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First a light cloud of horse, Tartars they seem'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Ilyats of Khorassan; and behind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The royal troops of Persia, horse and foot,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Marshall'd battalions bright in burnish'd steel.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Peran-Wisa with his herald came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Threading the Tartar squadrons to the front,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with his staff kept back the foremost ranks.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And when Ferood, who led the Persians, saw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That Peran-Wisa kept the Tartars back,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He took his spear, and to the front he came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And check'd his ranks, and fix'd them where they stood.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the old Tartar came upon the sand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Betwixt the silent hosts, and spake, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ferood, and ye, Persians and Tartars, hear!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let there be truce between the hosts to-day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But choose a champion from the Persian lords<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To fight our champion Sohrab, man to man."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As, in the country, on a morn in June,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_70" id="Page_70">[70]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the dew glistens on the pearled ears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A shiver runs through the deep corn for joy&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So, when they heard what Peran-Wisa said,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A thrill through all the Tartar squadrons ran<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of pride and hope for Sohrab, whom they loved.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But as a troop of pedlars, from Cabool,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cross underneath the Indian Caucasus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That vast sky-neighbouring mountain of milk snow;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crossing so high, that, as they mount, they pass<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Long flocks of travelling birds dead on the snow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Choked by the air, and scarce can they themselves<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Slake their parch'd throats with sugar'd mulberries&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In single file they move, and stop their breath,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For fear they should dislodge the o'erhanging snows&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So the pale Persians held their breath with fear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to Ferood his brother chiefs came up<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To counsel; Gudurz and Zoarrah came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Feraburz, who ruled the Persian host<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Second, and was the uncle of the King;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These came and counsell'd, and then Gudurz said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ferood, shame bids us take their challenge up,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet champion have we none to match this youth.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He has the wild stag's foot, the lion's heart.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Rustum came last night; aloof he sits<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And sullen, and has pitch'd his tents apart.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Him will I seek, and carry to his ear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Tartar challenge, and this young man's name.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Haply he will forget his wrath, and fight.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stand forth the while, and take their challenge up."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So spake he; and Ferood stood forth and cried:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Old man, be it agreed as thou hast said!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let Sohrab arm, and we will find a man."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake: and Peran-Wisa turn'd, and strode<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_71" id="Page_71">[71]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Back through the opening squadrons to his tent.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But through the anxious Persians Gudurz ran,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And cross'd the camp which lay behind, and reach'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Out on the sands beyond it, Rustum's tents.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of scarlet cloth they were, and glittering gay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Just pitch'd; the high pavilion in the midst<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was Rustum's, and his men lay camp'd around.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Gudurz enter'd Rustum's tent, and found<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rustum; his morning meal was done, but still<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The table stood before him, charged with food&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A side of roasted sheep, and cakes of bread,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And dark green melons; and there Rustum sate<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Listless, and held a falcon on his wrist,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And play'd with it; but Gudurz came and stood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before him; and he look'd, and saw him stand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with a cry sprang up and dropp'd the bird,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And greeted Gudurz with both hands, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Welcome! these eyes could see no better sight.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What news? but sit down first, and eat and drink."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Gudurz stood in the tent-door, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Not now! a time will come to eat and drink,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But not to-day; to-day has other needs.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The armies are drawn out, and stand at gaze;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For from the Tartars is a challenge brought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To pick a champion from the Persian lords<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To fight their champion&mdash;and thou know'st his name&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sohrab men call him, but his birth is hid.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Rustum, like thy might is this young man's!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He has the wild stag's foot, the lion's heart;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he is young, and Iran's chiefs are old,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or else too weak; and all eyes turn to thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come down and help us, Rustum, or we lose!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; but Rustum answer'd with a smile:<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_72" id="Page_72">[72]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Go to! if Iran's chiefs are old, then I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Am older; if the young are weak, the King<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Errs strangely; for the King, for Kai Khosroo,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Himself is young, and honours younger men,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lets the aged moulder to their graves.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rustum he loves no more, but loves the young&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The young may rise at Sohrab's vaunts, not I.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For what care I, though all speak Sohrab's fame?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For would that I myself had such a son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And not that one slight helpless girl I have&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A son so famed, so brave, to send to war,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I to tarry with the snow-hair'd Zal,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My father, whom the robber Afghans vex,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And clip his borders short, and drive his herds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he has none to guard his weak old age.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There would I go, and hang my armour up,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with my great name fence that weak old man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And spend the goodly treasures I have got,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And rest my age, and hear of Sohrab's fame,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And leave to death the hosts of thankless kings,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with these slaughterous hands draw sword no more."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke, and smiled; and Gudurz made reply:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"What then, O Rustum, will men say to this,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When Sohrab dares our bravest forth, and seeks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thee most of all, and thou, whom most he seeks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hidest thy face? Take heed lest men should say:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Like some old miser, Rustum hoards his fame,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>And shuns to peril it with younger men.</i>"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, greatly moved, then Rustum made reply:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"O Gudurz, wherefore dost thou say such words?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou knowest better words than this to say.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What is one more, one less, obscure or famed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Valiant or craven, young or old, to me?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_73" id="Page_73">[73]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are not they mortal, am not I myself?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But who for men of nought would do great deeds?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, thou shalt see how Rustum hoards his fame!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But I will fight unknown, and in plain arms;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let not men say of Rustum, he was match'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In single fight with any mortal man."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke, and frown'd; and Gudurz turn'd, and ran<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Back quickly through the camp in fear and joy&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fear at his wrath, but joy that Rustum came.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Rustum strode to his tent-door, and call'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His followers in, and bade them bring his arms,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And clad himself in steel; the arms he chose<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were plain, and on his shield was no device,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Only his helm was rich, inlaid with gold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, from the fluted spine atop, a plume<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of horsehair waved, a scarlet horsehair plume.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So arm'd, he issued forth; and Ruksh, his horse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Follow'd him like a faithful hound at heel&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ruksh, whose renown was noised through all the earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The horse, whom Rustum on a foray once<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Did in Bokhara by the river find<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A colt beneath its dam, and drove him home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And rear'd him; a bright bay, with lofty crest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dight with a saddle-cloth of broider'd green<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crusted with gold, and on the ground were work'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All beasts of chase, all beasts which hunters know.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So follow'd, Rustum left his tents, and cross'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The camp, and to the Persian host appear'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all the Persians knew him, and with shouts<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hail'd; but the Tartars knew not who he was.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And dear as the wet diver to the eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of his pale wife who waits and weeps on shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By sandy Bahrein, in the Persian Gulf,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_74" id="Page_74">[74]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Plunging all day in the blue waves, at night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Having made up his tale of precious pearls,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rejoins her in their hut upon the sands&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So dear to the pale Persians Rustum came.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rustum to the Persian front advanced,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Sohrab arm'd in Haman's tent, and came.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as afield the reapers cut a swath<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down through the middle of a rich man's corn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on each side are squares of standing corn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the midst a stubble, short and bare&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So on each side were squares of men, with spears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bristling, and in the midst, the open sand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rustum came upon the sand, and cast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His eyes toward the Tartar tents, and saw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sohrab come forth, and eyed him as he came.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As some rich woman, on a winter's morn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Eyes through her silken curtains the poor drudge<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who with numb blacken'd fingers makes her fire&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At cock-crow, on a starlit winter's morn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the frost flowers the whiten'd window-panes&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wonders how she lives, and what the thoughts<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of that poor drudge may be; so Rustum eyed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The unknown adventurous youth, who from afar<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Came seeking Rustum, and defying forth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All the most valiant chiefs; long he perused<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His spirited air, and wonder'd who he was.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For very young he seem'd, tenderly rear'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like some young cypress, tall, and dark, and straight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which in a queen's secluded garden throws<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Its slight dark shadow on the moonlit turf,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By midnight, to a bubbling fountain's sound&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So slender Sohrab seem'd, so softly rear'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And a deep pity enter'd Rustum's soul<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_75" id="Page_75">[75]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">As he beheld him coming; and he stood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And beckon'd to him with his hand, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"O thou young man, the air of Heaven is soft,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And warm, and pleasant; but the grave is cold!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Heaven's air is better than the cold dead grave.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behold me! I am vast, and clad in iron,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And tried; and I have stood on many a field<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of blood, and I have fought with many a foe&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Never was that field lost, or that foe saved.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Sohrab, wherefore wilt thou rush on death?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be govern'd! quit the Tartar host, and come<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Iran, and be as my son to me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fight beneath my banner till I die!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There are no youths in Iran brave as thou."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So he spake, mildly; Sohrab heard his voice,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mighty voice of Rustum, and he saw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His giant figure planted on the sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sole, like some single tower, which a chief<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hath builded on the waste in former years<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against the robbers; and he saw that head,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Streak'd with its first grey hairs;&mdash;hope filled his soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he ran forward and embraced his knees,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And clasp'd his hand within his own, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"O, by thy father's head! by thine own soul!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Art thou not Rustum? speak! art thou not he?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Rustum eyed askance the kneeling youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And turn'd away, and spake to his own soul:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ah me, I muse what this young fox may mean!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">False, wily, boastful, are these Tartar boys.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For if I now confess this thing he asks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hide it not, but say: <i>Rustum is here!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">He will not yield indeed, nor quit our foes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he will find some pretext not to fight,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_76" id="Page_76">[76]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And praise my fame, and proffer courteous gifts<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A belt or sword perhaps, and go his way.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on a feast-tide, in Afrasiab's hall,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Samarcand, he will arise and cry:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'I challenged once, when the two armies camp'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beside the Oxus, all the Persian lords<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To cope with me in single fight; but they<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shrank, only Rustum dared; then he and I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Changed gifts, and went on equal terms away.'<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So will he speak, perhaps, while men applaud;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then were the chiefs of Iran shamed through me."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then he turn'd, and sternly spake aloud:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Rise! wherefore dost thou vainly question thus<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Rustum? I am here, whom thou hast call'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By challenge forth; make good thy vaunt, or yield!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is it with Rustum only thou wouldst fight?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rash boy, men look on Rustum's face and flee!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For well I know, that did great Rustum stand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before thy face this day, and were reveal'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There would be then no talk of fighting more.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But being what I am, I tell thee this&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do thou record it in thine inmost soul:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Either thou shalt renounce thy vaunt and yield,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or else thy bones shall strew this sand, till winds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bleach them, or Oxus with his summer-floods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oxus in summer wash them all away."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; and Sohrab answer'd, on his feet:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Art thou so fierce? Thou wilt not fright me so!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I am no girl, to be made pale by words.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet this thou hast said well, did Rustum stand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here on this field, there were no fighting then.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Rustum is far hence, and we stand here.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Begin! thou art more vast, more dread than I,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_77" id="Page_77">[77]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou art proved, I know, and I am young&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But yet success sways with the breath of Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And though thou thinkest that thou knowest sure<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy victory, yet thou canst not surely know.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For we are all, like swimmers in the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Poised on the top of a huge wave of fate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which hangs uncertain to which side to fall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And whether it will heave us up to land,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or whether it will roll us out to sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Back out to sea, to the deep waves of death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We know not, and no search will make us know;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Only the event will teach us in its hour."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke, and Rustum answer'd not, but hurl'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His spear; down from the shoulder, down it came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As on some partridge in the corn a hawk,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That long has tower'd in the airy clouds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Drops like a plummet; Sohrab saw it come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And sprang aside, quick as a flash; the spear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hiss'd, and went quivering down into the sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which it sent flying wide;&mdash;then Sohrab threw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In turn, and full struck Rustum's shield; sharp rang,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The iron plates rang sharp, but turn'd the spear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rustum seized his club, which none but he<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Could wield; an unlopp'd trunk it was, and huge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still rough&mdash;like those which men in treeless plains<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To build them boats fish from the flooded rivers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hyphasis or Hydaspes, when, high up<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By their dark springs, the wind in winter-time<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hath made in Himalayan forests wrack,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And strewn the channels with torn boughs&mdash;so huge<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The club which Rustum lifted now, and struck<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One stroke; but again Sohrab sprang aside,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lithe as the glancing snake, and the club came<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_78" id="Page_78">[78]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thundering to earth, and leapt from Rustum's hand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rustum follow'd his own blow, and fell<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To his knees, and with his fingers clutch'd the sand;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now might Sohrab have unsheathed his sword,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And pierced the mighty Rustum while he lay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dizzy, and on his knees, and choked with sand;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he look'd on, and smiled, nor bared his sword,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But courteously drew back, and spoke, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Thou strik'st too hard! that club of thine will float<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the summer-floods, and not my bones.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But rise, and be not wroth! not wroth am I;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No, when I see thee, wrath forsakes my soul.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou say'st, thou art not Rustum; be it so!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who art thou then, that canst so touch my soul?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Boy as I am, I have seen battles too&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have waded foremost in their bloody waves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And heard their hollow roar of dying men;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But never was my heart thus touch'd before.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are they from Heaven, these softenings of the heart?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O thou old warrior, let us yield to Heaven!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, plant we here in earth our angry spears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And make a truce, and sit upon this sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And pledge each other in red wine, like friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou shalt talk to me of Rustum's deeds.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There are enough foes in the Persian host,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom I may meet, and strike, and feel no pang;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Champions enough Afrasiab has, whom thou<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mayst fight; fight <i>them</i>, when they confront thy spear!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But oh, let there be peace 'twixt thee and me!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He ceased, but while he spake, Rustum had risen,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And stood erect, trembling with rage; his club<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He left to lie, but had regain'd his spear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose fiery point now in his mail'd right-hand<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_79" id="Page_79">[79]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blazed bright and baleful, like that autumn-star,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The baleful sign of fevers; dust had soil'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His stately crest, and dimm'd his glittering arms.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His breast heaved, his lips foam'd, and twice his voice<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was choked with rage; at last these words broke way:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Girl! nimble with thy feet, not with thy hands!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Curl'd minion, dancer, coiner of sweet words!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fight, let me hear thy hateful voice no more!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou art not in Afrasiab's gardens now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With Tartar girls, with whom thou art wont to dance;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But on the Oxus-sands, and in the dance<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of battle, and with me, who make no play<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of war; I fight it out, and hand to hand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Speak not to me of truce, and pledge, and wine!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Remember all thy valour; try thy feints<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And cunning! all the pity I had is gone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because thou hast shamed me before both the hosts<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With thy light skipping tricks, and thy girl's wiles."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke, and Sohrab kindled at his taunts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he too drew his sword; at once they rush'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Together, as two eagles on one prey<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come rushing down together from the clouds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One from the east, one from the west; their shields<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dash'd with a clang together, and a din<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rose, such as that the sinewy woodcutters<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Make often in the forest's heart at morn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of hewing axes, crashing trees&mdash;such blows<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rustum and Sohrab on each other hail'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And you would say that sun and stars took part<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In that unnatural conflict; for a cloud<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Grew suddenly in Heaven, and dark'd the sun<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the fighters' heads; and a wind rose<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under their feet, and moaning swept the plain,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_80" id="Page_80">[80]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in a sandy whirlwind wrapp'd the pair.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In gloom they twain were wrapp'd, and they alone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For both the on-looking hosts on either hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stood in broad daylight, and the sky was pure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the sun sparkled on the Oxus stream.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But in the gloom they fought, with bloodshot eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And labouring breath; first Rustum struck the shield<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which Sohrab held stiff out; the steel-spiked spear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rent the tough plates, but fail'd to reach the skin,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rustum pluck'd it back with angry groan.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then Sohrab with his sword smote Rustum's helm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor clove its steel quite through; but all the crest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He shore away, and that proud horsehair plume,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Never till now defiled, sank to the dust;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rustum bow'd his head; but then the gloom<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Grew blacker, thunder rumbled in the air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lightnings rent the cloud; and Ruksh, the horse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who stood at hand, utter'd a dreadful cry;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No horse's cry was that, most like the roar<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of some pain'd desert-lion, who all day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hath trail'd the hunter's javelin in his side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And comes at night to die upon the sand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The two hosts heard that cry, and quaked for fear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Oxus curdled as it cross'd his stream.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Sohrab heard, and quail'd not, but rush'd on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And struck again; and again Rustum bow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His head; but this time all the blade, like glass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sprang in a thousand shivers on the helm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the hand the hilt remain'd alone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then Rustum raised his head; his dreadful eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Glared, and he shook on high his menacing spear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And shouted: <i>Rustum!</i>&mdash;Sohrab heard that shout,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And shrank amazed; back he recoil'd one step,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_81" id="Page_81">[81]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And scann'd with blinking eyes the advancing form;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then he stood bewilder'd; and he dropp'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His covering shield, and the spear pierced his side.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He reel'd, and staggering back, sank to the ground;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then the gloom dispersed, and the wind fell,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the bright sun broke forth, and melted all<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The cloud; and the two armies saw the pair&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Saw Rustum standing, safe upon his feet,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Sohrab, wounded, on the bloody sand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, with a bitter smile, Rustum began:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Sohrab, thou thoughtest in thy mind to kill<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A Persian lord this day, and strip his corpse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bear thy trophies to Afrasiab's tent.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or else that the great Rustum would come down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Himself to fight, and that thy wiles would move<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His heart to take a gift, and let thee go.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then that all the Tartar host would praise<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy courage or thy craft, and spread thy fame,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To glad thy father in his weak old age.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fool, thou art slain, and by an unknown man!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dearer to the red jackals shalt thou be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than to thy friends, and to thy father old."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, with a fearless mien, Sohrab replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Unknown thou art; yet thy fierce vaunt is vain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou dost not slay me, proud and boastful man!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No! Rustum slays me, and this filial heart.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For were I match'd with ten such men as thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I were that which till to-day I was,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They should be lying here, I standing there.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But that belov&eacute;d name unnerved my arm&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That name, and something, I confess, in thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which troubles all my heart, and made my shield<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fall; and thy spear transfix'd an unarm'd foe.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_82" id="Page_82">[82]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now thou boastest, and insult'st my fate.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But hear thou this, fierce man, tremble to hear:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mighty Rustum shall avenge my death!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My father, whom I seek through all the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He shall avenge my death, and punish thee!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As when some hunter in the spring hath found<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A breeding eagle sitting on her nest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the craggy isle of a hill-lake,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And pierced her with an arrow as she rose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And follow'd her to find her where she fell<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far off;&mdash;anon her mate comes winging back<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From hunting, and a great way off descries<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His huddling young left sole; at that, he checks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His pinion, and with short uneasy sweeps<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Circles above his eyry, with loud screams<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Chiding his mate back to her nest; but she<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lies dying, with the arrow in her side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In some far stony gorge out of his ken,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A heap of fluttering feathers&mdash;never more<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall the lake glass her, flying over it;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Never the black and dripping precipices<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Echo her stormy scream as she sails by&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As that poor bird flies home, nor knows his loss,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So Rustum knew not his own loss, but stood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over his dying son, and knew him not.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, with a cold incredulous voice, he said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"What prate is this of fathers and revenge?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mighty Rustum never had a son."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, with a failing voice, Sohrab replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ah yes, he had! and that lost son am I.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Surely the news will one day reach his ear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Reach Rustum, where he sits, and tarries long,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Somewhere, I know not where, but far from here;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_83" id="Page_83">[83]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And pierce him like a stab, and make him leap<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To arms, and cry for vengeance upon thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fierce man, bethink thee, for an only son!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What will that grief, what will that vengeance be?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oh, could I live, till I that grief had seen!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet him I pity not so much, but her,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My mother, who in Ader-baijan dwells<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With that old king, her father, who grows grey<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With age, and rules over the valiant Koords.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her most I pity, who no more will see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sohrab returning from the Tartar camp,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With spoils and honour, when the war is done.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But a dark rumour will be bruited up,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From tribe to tribe, until it reach her ear;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then will that defenceless woman learn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That Sohrab will rejoice her sight no more,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But that in battle with a nameless foe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the far-distant Oxus, he is slain."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; and as he ceased, he wept aloud,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thinking of her he left, and his own death.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; but Rustum listen'd, plunged in thought.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor did he yet believe it was his son<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who spoke, although he call'd back names he knew;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For he had had sure tidings that the babe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which was in Ader-baijan born to him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had been a puny girl, no boy at all&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So that sad mother sent him word, for fear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rustum should seek the boy, to train in arms<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And so he deem'd that either Sohrab took,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By a false boast, the style of Rustum's son;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or that men gave it him, to swell his fame.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So deem'd he; yet he listen'd, plunged in thought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his soul set to grief, as the vast tide<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_84" id="Page_84">[84]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the bright rocking Ocean sets to shore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At the full moon; tears gather'd in his eyes;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For he remember'd his own early youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all its bounding rapture; as, at dawn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The shepherd from his mountain-lodge descries<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A far, bright city, smitten by the sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through many rolling clouds&mdash;so Rustum saw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His youth; saw Sohrab's mother, in her bloom;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that old king, her father, who loved well<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His wandering guest, and gave him his fair child<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With joy; and all the pleasant life they led,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They three, in that long-distant summer-time&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The castle, and the dewy woods, and hunt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hound, and morn on those delightful hills<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Ader-baijan. And he saw that Youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of age and looks to be his own dear son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Piteous and lovely, lying on the sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like some rich hyacinth which by the scythe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of an unskilful gardener has been cut,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mowing the garden grass-plots near its bed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lies, a fragrant tower of purple bloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the mown, dying grass&mdash;so Sohrab lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lovely in death, upon the common sand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rustum gazed on him with grief, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"O Sohrab, thou indeed art such a son<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom Rustum, wert thou his, might well have loved.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet here thou errest, Sohrab, or else men<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have told thee false&mdash;thou art not Rustum's son.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For Rustum had no son; one child he had&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But one&mdash;a girl; who with her mother now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Plies some light female task, nor dreams of us&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of us she dreams not, nor of wounds, nor war."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Sohrab answer'd him in wrath; for now<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_85" id="Page_85">[85]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The anguish of the deep-fix'd spear grew fierce,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he desired to draw forth the steel,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And let the blood flow free, and so to die&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But first he would convince his stubborn foe;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, rising sternly on one arm, he said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Man, who art thou who dost deny my words?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Truth sits upon the lips of dying men,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And falsehood, while I lived, was far from mine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I tell thee, prick'd upon this arm I bear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That seal which Rustum to my mother gave,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That she might prick it on the babe she bore."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; and all the blood left Rustum's cheeks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his knees totter'd, and he smote his hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against his breast, his heavy mailed hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That the hard iron corslet clank'd aloud;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to his heart he press'd the other hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in a hollow voice he spake, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Sohrab, that were a proof which could not lie!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If thou show this, then art thou Rustum's son."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, with weak hasty fingers, Sohrab loosed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His belt, and near the shoulder bared his arm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And show'd a sign in faint vermilion points<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prick'd; as a cunning workman, in Pekin,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pricks with vermilion some clear porcelain vase,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An emperor's gift&mdash;at early morn he paints,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all day long, and, when night comes, the lamp<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lights up his studious forehead and thin hands&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So delicately prick'd the sign appear'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On Sohrab's arm, the sign of Rustum's seal.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It was that griffin, which of old rear'd Zal,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rustum's great father, whom they left to die,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A helpless babe, among the mountain-rocks;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Him that kind creature found, and rear'd, and loved<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_86" id="Page_86">[86]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then Rustum took it for his glorious sign.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Sohrab bared that image on his arm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And himself scann'd it long with mournful eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then he touch'd it with his hand and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"How say'st thou? Is that sign the proper sign<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Rustum's son, or of some other man's?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; but Rustum gazed, and gazed, and stood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Speechless; and then he utter'd one sharp cry:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>O boy&mdash;thy father!</i>&mdash;and his voice choked there.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then a dark cloud pass'd before his eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his head swam, and he sank down to earth.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Sohrab crawl'd to where he lay, and cast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His arms about his neck, and kiss'd his lips,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with fond faltering fingers stroked his cheeks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Trying to call him back to life; and life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Came back to Rustum, and he oped his eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they stood wide with horror; and he seized<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In both his hands the dust which lay around,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And threw it on his head, and smirch'd his hair,&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His hair, and face, and beard, and glittering arms;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And strong convulsive groanings shook his breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his sobs choked him; and he clutch'd his sword,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To draw it, and for ever let life out.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Sohrab saw his thought, and held his hands,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with a soothing voice he spake, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Father, forbear! for I but meet to-day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The doom which at my birth was written down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Heaven, and thou art Heaven's unconscious hand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Surely my heart cried out that it was thou,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When first I saw thee; and thy heart spoke too,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know it! but fate trod those promptings down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under its iron heel; fate, fate engaged<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The strife, and hurl'd me on my father's spear.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_87" id="Page_87">[87]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">But let us speak no more of this! I find<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My father; let me feel that I have found!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, sit beside me on this sand, and take<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My head betwixt thy hands, and kiss my cheeks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wash them with thy tears, and say: <i>My son!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Quick! quick! for number'd are my sands of life,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And swift; for like the lightning to this field<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I came, and like the wind I go away&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sudden, and swift, and like a passing wind.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But it was writ in Heaven that this should be."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So said he, and his voice released the heart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Rustum, and his tears broke forth; he cast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His arms round his son's neck, and wept aloud,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And kiss'd him. And awe fell on both the hosts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When they saw Rustum's grief; and Ruksh, the horse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With his head bowing to the ground and mane<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sweeping the dust, came near, and in mute woe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First to the one then to the other moved<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His head, as if inquiring what their grief<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might mean; and from his dark, compassionate eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The big warm tears roll'd down, and caked the sand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Rustum chid him with stern voice, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ruksh, now thou grievest; but, O Ruksh, thy feet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Should first have rotted on their nimble joints,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or ere they brought thy master to this field!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Sohrab look'd upon the horse and said;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Is this, then, Ruksh? How often, in past days,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My mother told me of thee, thou brave steed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My terrible father's terrible horse! and said,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That I should one day find thy lord and thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, let me lay my hand upon thy mane!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Ruksh, thou art more fortunate than I;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For thou hast gone where I shall never go,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_88" id="Page_88">[88]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And snuff'd the breezes of my father's home.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou hast trod the sands of Seistan,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And seen the River of Helmund, and the Lake<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Zirrah; and the aged Zal himself<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Has often stroked thy neck, and given thee food,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Corn in a golden platter soak'd with wine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And said; <i>O Ruksh! bear Rustum well!</i>&mdash;but I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have never known my grandsire's furrow'd face,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor seen his lofty house in Seistan,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor slaked my thirst at the clear Helmund stream;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But lodged among my father's foes, and seen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Afrasiab's cities only, Samarcand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bokhara, and lone Khiva in the waste,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the black Toorkmun tents; and only drunk<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The desert rivers, Moorghab and Tejend,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Kohik, and where the Kalmuks feed their sheep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The northern Sir; and this great Oxus stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The yellow Oxus, by whose brink I die."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, with a heavy groan, Rustum bewail'd:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Oh, that its waves were flowing over me!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oh, that I saw its grains of yellow silt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Roll tumbling in the current o'er my head!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, with a grave mild voice, Sohrab replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Desire not that, my father! thou must live.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For some are born to do great deeds, and live,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As some are born to be obscured, and die.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do thou the deeds I die too young to do,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And reap a second glory in thine age;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou art my father, and thy gain is mine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But come! thou seest this great host of men<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which follow me; I pray thee, slay not these!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let me entreat for them; what have they done?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They follow'd me, my hope, my fame, my star.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_89" id="Page_89">[89]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let them all cross the Oxus back in peace.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But me thou must bear hence, not send with them,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But carry me with thee to Seistan,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And place me on a bed, and mourn for me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou, and the snow-hair'd Zal, and all thy friends.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou must lay me in that lovely earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And heap a stately mound above my bones,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And plant a far-seen pillar over all.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That so the passing horseman on the waste<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May see my tomb a great way off, and cry:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Sohrab, the mighty Rustum's son, lies there,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Whom his great father did in ignorance kill!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I be not forgotten in my grave."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, with a mournful voice, Rustum replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Fear not! as thou hast said, Sohrab, my son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So shall it be; for I will burn my tents,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And quit the host, and bear thee hence with me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And carry thee away to Seistan,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And place thee on a bed, and mourn for thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With the snow-headed Zal, and all my friends.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I will lay thee in that lovely earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And heap a stately mound above thy bones,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And plant a far-seen pillar over all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And men shall not forget thee in thy grave.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I will spare thy host; yea, let them go!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let them all cross the Oxus back in peace!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What should I do with slaying any more?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For would that all that I have ever slain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might be once more alive; my bitterest foes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they who were call'd champions in their time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And through whose death I won that fame I have&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I were nothing but a common man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A poor, mean soldier, and without renown,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_90" id="Page_90">[90]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">So thou mightest live too, my son, my son!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or rather would that I, even I myself,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might now be lying on this bloody sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Near death, and by an ignorant stroke of thine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not thou of mine! and I might die, not thou;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I, not thou, be borne to Seistan;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Zal might weep above my grave, not thine;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And say: <i>O son, I weep thee not too sore,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>For willingly, I know, thou met'st thine end!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">But now in blood and battles was my youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And full of blood and battles is my age,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I shall never end this life of blood."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, at the point of death, Sohrab replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"A life of blood indeed, thou dreadful man!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou shalt yet have peace; only not now,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not yet! but thou shalt have it on that day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When thou shalt sail in a high-masted ship,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou and the other peers of Kai Khosroo,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Returning home over the salt blue sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From laying thy dear master in his grave."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rustum gazed in Sohrab's face, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Soon be that day, my son, and deep that sea!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till then, if fate so wills, let me endure."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; and Sohrab smiled on him, and took<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The spear, and drew it from his side, and eased<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His wound's imperious anguish; but the blood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Came welling from the open gash, and life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flow'd with the stream;&mdash;all down his cold white side<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The crimson torrent ran, dim now and soil'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like the soil'd tissue of white violets<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Left, freshly gather'd, on their native bank,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By children whom their nurses call with haste<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Indoors from the sun's eye; his head droop'd low,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_91" id="Page_91">[91]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">His limbs grew slack; motionless, white, he lay&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">White, with eyes closed; only when heavy gasps,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Deep heavy gasps quivering through all his frame,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Convulsed him back to life, he open'd them,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fix'd them feebly on his father's face;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till now all strength was ebb'd, and from his limbs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unwillingly the spirit fled away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Regretting the warm mansion which it left,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And youth, and bloom, and this delightful world.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So, on the bloody sand, Sohrab lay dead;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the great Rustum drew his horseman's cloak<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down o'er his face, and sate by his dead son.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As those black granite pillars, once high-rear'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By Jemshid in Persepolis, to bear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His house, now 'mid their broken flights of steps<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lie prone, enormous, down the mountain side&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So in the sand lay Rustum by his son.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And night came down over the solemn waste,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the two gazing hosts, and that sole pair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And darken'd all; and a cold fog, with night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crept from the Oxus. Soon a hum arose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As of a great assembly loosed, and fires<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Began to twinkle through the fog; for now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Both armies moved to camp, and took their meal;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Persians took it on the open sands<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Southward, the Tartars by the river marge;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rustum and his son were left alone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the majestic river floated on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Out of the mist and hum of that low land,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the frosty starlight, and there moved,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rejoicing, through the hush'd Chorasmian waste,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the solitary moon;&mdash;he flow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Right for the polar star, past Orgunj&egrave;,
<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_92" id="Page_92">[92]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Brimming, and bright, and large; then sands begin<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To hem his watery march, and dam his streams,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And split his currents; that for many a league<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The shorn and parcell'd Oxus strains along<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through beds of sand and matted rushy isles&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oxus, forgetting the bright speed he had<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In his high mountain-cradle in Pamere,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A foil'd circuitous wanderer&mdash;till at last<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The long'd-for dash of waves is heard, and wide<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His luminous home of waters opens, bright<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And tranquil, from whose floor the new-bathed stars<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Emerge, and shine upon the Aral Sea.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_SICK_KING_IN_BOKHARA" id="THE_SICK_KING_IN_BOKHARA"></a>THE SICK KING IN BOKHARA</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Hussein</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O most just Vizier, send away<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The cloth-merchants, and let them be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Them and their dues, this day! the King<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is ill at ease, and calls for thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Vizier</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O merchants, tarry yet a day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here in Bokhara! but at noon,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To-morrow, come, and ye shall pay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Each fortieth web of cloth to me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As the law is, and go your way.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_93" id="Page_93">[93]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Hussein, lead me to the King!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou teller of sweet tales, thine own,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ferdousi's, and the others', lead!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How is it with my lord?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Hussein</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i10">Alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ever since prayer-time, he doth wait,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Vizier! without lying down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the great window of the gate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Looking into the Regist&agrave;n,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where through the sellers' booths the slaves<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are this way bringing the dead man.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Vizier, here is the King's door!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The King</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O Vizier, I may bury him?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Vizier</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O King, thou know'st, I have been sick<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These many days, and heard no thing<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(For Allah shut my ears and mind),<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not even what thou dost, O King!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wherefore, that I may counsel thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let Hussein, if thou wilt, make haste<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To speak in order what hath chanced.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The King</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O Vizier, be it as thou say'st!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Hussein</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Three days since, at the time of prayer<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A certain Moollah, with his robe<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_94" id="Page_94">[94]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">All rent, and dust upon his hair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Watch'd my lord's coming forth, and push'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The golden mace-bearers aside,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fell at the King's feet, and cried:<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Justice, O King, and on myself!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On this great sinner, who did break<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The law, and by the law must die!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vengeance, O King!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">But the King spake:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"What fool is this, that hurts our ears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With folly? or what drunken slave?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My guards, what, prick him with your spears!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prick me the fellow from the path!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As the King said, so it was done,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to the mosque my lord pass'd on.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But on the morrow, when the King<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Went forth again, the holy book<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Carried before him, as is right,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And through the square his way he took;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My man comes running, fleck'd with blood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From yesterday, and falling down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cries out most earnestly: "O King,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My lord, O King, do right, I pray!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"How canst thou, ere thou hear, discern<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If I speak folly? but a king,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whether a thing be great or small,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like Allah, hears and judges all.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Wherefore hear thou! Thou know'st, how fierce<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In these last days the sun hath burn'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That the green water in the tanks<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_95" id="Page_95">[95]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is to a putrid puddle turn'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the canal, which from the stream<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Samarcand is brought this way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wastes, and runs thinner every day.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Now I at nightfall had gone forth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alone, and in a darksome place<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under some mulberry-trees I found<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A little pool; and in short space,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With all the water that was there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I fill'd my pitcher, and stole home<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unseen; and having drink to spare,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I hid the can behind the door,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And went up on the roof to sleep.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"But in the night, which was with wind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And burning dust, again I creep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down, having fever, for a drink.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Now meanwhile had my brethren found<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The water-pitcher, where it stood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behind the door upon the ground,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And call'd my mother; and they all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As they were thirsty, and the night<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Most sultry, drain'd the pitcher there;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That they sate with it, in my sight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their lips still wet, when I came down.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Now mark! I, being fever'd, sick<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(Most unblest also), at that sight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Brake forth, and cursed them&mdash;dost thou hear?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One was my mother&mdash;&mdash;Now, do right!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But my lord mused a space, and said:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Send him away, Sirs, and make on!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_96" id="Page_96">[96]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">It is some madman!" the King said.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As the King bade, so was it done.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The morrow, at the self-same hour,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the King's path, behold, the man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not kneeling, sternly fix'd! he stood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Right opposite, and thus began,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Frowning grim down: "Thou wicked King,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Most deaf where thou shouldst most give ear!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What, must I howl in the next world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because thou wilt not listen here?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"What, wilt thou pray, and get thee grace,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all grace shall to me be grudged?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nay but, I swear, from this thy path<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I will not stir till I be judged!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then they who stood about the King<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Drew close together and conferr'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till that the King stood forth and said:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Before the priests thou shalt be heard."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But when the Ulemas were met,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the thing heard, they doubted not;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But sentenced him, as the law is,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To die by stoning on the spot.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Now the King charged us secretly:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Stoned must he be, the law stands so.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet, if he seek to fly, give way;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hinder him not, but let him go."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So saying, the King took a stone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And cast it softly;&mdash;but the man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With a great joy upon his face,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Kneel'd down, and cried not, neither ran.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_97" id="Page_97">[97]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So they, whose lot it was, cast stones,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That they flew thick and bruised him sore.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he praised Allah with loud voice,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And remain'd kneeling as before.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">My lord had cover'd up his face;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when one told him, "He is dead,"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Turning him quickly to go in,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Bring thou to me his corpse," he said.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And truly, while I speak, O King,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I hear the bearers on the stair;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wilt thou they straightway bring him in?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Ho! enter ye who tarry there!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Vizier</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O King, in this I praise thee not!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now must I call thy grief not wise.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is he thy friend, or of thy blood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To find such favour in thine eyes?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Nay, were he thine own mother's son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still, thou art king, and the law stands.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It were not meet the balance swerved,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sword were broken in thy hands.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But being nothing, as he is,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why for no cause make sad thy face?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lo, I am old! three kings, ere thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have I seen reigning in this place.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But who, through all this length of time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Could bear the burden of his years,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If he for strangers pain'd his heart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not less than those who merit tears?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_98" id="Page_98">[98]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Fathers we <i>must</i> have, wife and child,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And grievous is the grief for these;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This pain alone, which <i>must</i> be borne,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Makes the head white, and bows the knees.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But other loads than this his own<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One man is not well made to bear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Besides, to each are his own friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To mourn with him, and show him care.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Look, this is but one single place,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though it be great; all the earth round,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If a man bear to have it so,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Things which might vex him shall be found.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Upon the Russian frontier, where<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The watchers of two armies stand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Near one another, many a man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seeking a prey unto his hand,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hath snatch'd a little fair-hair'd slave;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They snatch also, towards Merv&egrave;,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Shiah dogs, who pasture sheep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And up from thence to Orgunj&egrave;.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And these all, labouring for a lord,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Eat not the fruit of their own hands;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which is the heaviest of all plagues,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To that man's mind, who understands.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The kaffirs also (whom God curse!)<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vex one another, night and day;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There are the lepers, and all sick;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There are the poor, who faint alway<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_99" id="Page_99">[99]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">All these have sorrow, and keep still,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whilst other men make cheer, and sing.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wilt thou have pity on all these?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No, nor on this dead dog, O King!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The King</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O Vizier, thou art old, I young!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clear in these things I cannot see.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My head is burning, and a heat<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is in my skin which angers me.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But hear ye this, ye sons of men!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They that bear rule, and are obey'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unto a rule more strong than theirs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are in their turn obedient made.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In vain therefore, with wistful eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gazing up hither, the poor man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who loiters by the high-heap'd booths,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Below there, in the Regist&agrave;n,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Says: "Happy he, who lodges there!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With silken raiment, store of rice,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And for this drought, all kinds of fruits,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Grape-syrup, squares of colour'd ice,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"With cherries serv'd in drifts of snow."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In vain hath a king power to build<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Houses, arcades, enamell'd mosques;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to make orchard-closes, fill'd<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">With curious fruit-trees brought from far<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With cisterns for the winter-rain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, in the desert, spacious inns<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In divers places&mdash;if that pain<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_100" id="Page_100">[100]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is not more lighten'd, which he feels,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If his will be not satisfied;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that it be not, from all time<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The law is planted, to abide.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou wast a sinner, thou poor man!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou wast athirst; and didst not see,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That, though we take what we desire,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We must not snatch it eagerly.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And I have meat and drink at will,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And rooms of treasures, not a few.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But I am sick, nor heed I these;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And what I would, I cannot do.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Even the great honour which I have,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When I am dead, will soon grow still;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So have I neither joy, nor fame.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But what I can do, that I will.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I have a fretted brick-work tomb<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon a hill on the right hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hard by a close of apricots,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the road of Samarcand;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thither, O Vizier, will I bear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This man my pity could not save,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, plucking up the marble flags,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There lay his body in my grave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Bring water, nard, and linen rolls!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wash off all blood, set smooth each limb!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then say: "He was not wholly vile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because a king shall bury him."</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_101" id="Page_101">[101]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="BALDER_DEAD7" id="BALDER_DEAD7"></a>BALDER DEAD<a name="FNanchor_7_9" id="FNanchor_7_9"></a><a href="#Footnote_7_9" class="fnanchor">[7]</a></h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>I. SENDING</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So on the floor lay Balder dead; and round<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lay thickly strewn swords, axes, darts, and spears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which all the Gods in sport had idly thrown<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At Balder, whom no weapon pierced or clove;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But in his breast stood fixt the fatal bough<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of mistletoe, which Lok the Accuser gave<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Hoder, and unwitting Hoder threw&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Gainst that alone had Balder's life no charm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all the Gods and all the Heroes came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And stood round Balder on the bloody floor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Weeping and wailing; and Valhalla rang<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Up to its golden roof with sobs and cries;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the tables stood the untasted meats,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the horns and gold-rimm'd skulls the wine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now would night have fall'n, and found them yet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wailing; but otherwise was Odin's will.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thus the father of the ages spake:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Enough of tears, ye Gods, enough of wail!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not to lament in was Valhalla made.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If any here might weep for Balder's death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I most might weep, his father; such a son<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I lose to-day, so bright, so loved a God.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he has met that doom, which long ago<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Nornies, when his mother bare him, spun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fate set seal, that so his end must be.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Balder has met his death, and ye survive&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Weep him an hour, but what can grief avail?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For ye yourselves, ye Gods, shall meet your doom,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_102" id="Page_102">[102]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">All ye who hear me, and inhabit Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I too, Odin too, the Lord of all.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But ours we shall not meet, when that day comes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With women's tears and weak complaining cries&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why should we meet another's portion so?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rather it fits you, having wept your hour,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With cold dry eyes, and hearts composed and stern,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To live, as erst, your daily life in Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By me shall vengeance on the murderer Lok,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The foe, the accuser, whom, though Gods, we hate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be strictly cared for, in the appointed day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Meanwhile, to-morrow, when the morning dawns,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bring wood to the seashore to Balder's ship,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the deck build high a funeral-pile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the top lay Balder's corpse, and put<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fire to the wood, and send him out to sea<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To burn; for that is what the dead desire."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So spake the King of Gods, and straightway rose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And mounted his horse Sleipner, whom he rode;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from the hall of Heaven he rode away<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Lidskialf, and sate upon his throne,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mount, from whence his eye surveys the world.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And far from Heaven he turn'd his shining orbs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To look on Midgard, and the earth, and men.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the conjuring Lapps he bent his gaze<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom antler'd reindeer pull over the snow;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the Finns, the gentlest of mankind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fair men, who live in holes under the ground;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor did he look once more to Ida's plain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor tow'rd Valhalla, and the sorrowing Gods;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For well he knew the Gods would heed his word,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And cease to mourn, and think of Balder's pyre.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But in Valhalla all the Gods went back<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_103" id="Page_103">[103]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">From around Balder, all the Heroes went;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And left his body stretch'd upon the floor.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on their golden chairs they sate again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beside the tables, in the hall of Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And before each the cooks who served them placed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">New messes of the boar Serimner's flesh,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the Valkyries crown'd their horns with mead.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So they, with pent-up hearts and tearless eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wailing no more, in silence ate and drank,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While twilight fell, and sacred night came on.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the blind Hoder left the feasting Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Odin's hall, and went through Asgard streets,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And past the haven where the Gods have moor'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their ships, and through the gate, beyond the wall;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though sightless, yet his own mind led the God.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down to the margin of the roaring sea<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He came, and sadly went along the sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Between the waves and black o'erhanging cliffs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where in and out the screaming seafowl fly;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Until he came to where a gully breaks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the cliff-wall, and a fresh stream runs down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the high moors behind, and meets the sea.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There, in the glen, Fensaler stands, the house<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Frea, honour'd mother of the Gods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And shows its lighted windows to the main.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There he went up, and pass'd the open doors;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the hall he found those women old,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The prophetesses, who by rite eterne<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On Frea's hearth feed high the sacred fire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Both night and day; and by the inner wall<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon her golden chair the Mother sate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With folded hands, revolving things to come.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To her drew Hoder near, and spake, and said:<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_104" id="Page_104">[104]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Mother, a child of bale thou bar'st in me!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For, first, thou barest me with blinded eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sightless and helpless, wandering weak in Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, after that, of ignorant witless mind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou barest me, and unforeseeing soul;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That I alone must take the branch from Lok,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The foe, the accuser, whom, though Gods, we hate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And cast it at the dear-loved Balder's breast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At whom the Gods in sport their weapons threw&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Gainst that alone had Balder's life no charm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now therefore what to attempt, or whither fly,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For who will bear my hateful sight in Heaven?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Can I, O mother, bring them Balder back?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or&mdash;for thou know'st the fates, and things allow'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Can I with Hela's power a compact strike,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And make exchange, and give my life for his?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke: the mother of the Gods replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Hoder, ill-fated, child of bale, my son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sightless in soul and eye, what words are these?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That one, long portion'd with his doom of death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Should change his lot, and fill another's life,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hela yield to this, and let him go!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On Balder Death hath laid her hand, not thee;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor doth she count this life a price for that.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For many Gods in Heaven, not thou alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would freely die to purchase Balder back,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wend themselves to Hela's gloomy realm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For not so gladsome is that life in Heaven<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which Gods and heroes lead, in feast and fray,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Waiting the darkness of the final times,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That one should grudge its loss for Balder's sake,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Balder their joy, so bright, so loved a God.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But fate withstands, and laws forbid this way.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_105" id="Page_105">[105]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet in my secret mind one way I know,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor do I judge if it shall win or fail;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But much must still be tried, which shall but fail."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the blind Hoder answer'd her, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"What way is this, O mother, that thou show'st?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is it a matter which a God might try?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And straight the mother of the Gods replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"There is a road which leads to Hela's realm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Untrodden, lonely, far from light and Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who goes that way must take no other horse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To ride, but Sleipner, Odin's horse, alone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor must he choose that common path of Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which every day they come and go in Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er the bridge Bifrost, where is Heimdall's watch,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Past Midgard fortress, down to earth and men.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he must tread a dark untravell'd road<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which branches from the north of Heaven, and ride<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nine days, nine nights, toward the northern ice,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through valleys deep-engulph'd, with roaring streams.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he will reach on the tenth morn a bridge<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which spans with golden arches Giall's stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not Bifrost, but that bridge a damsel keeps,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who tells the passing troops of dead their way<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the low shore of ghosts, and Hela's realm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And she will bid him northward steer his course.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then he will journey through no lighted land,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor see the sun arise, nor see it set;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he must ever watch the northern Bear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who from her frozen height with jealous eye<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Confronts the Dog and Hunter in the south,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And is alone not dipt in Ocean's stream.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And straight he will come down to Ocean's strand&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ocean, whose watery ring enfolds the world,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_106" id="Page_106">[106]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on whose marge the ancient giants dwell.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he will reach its unknown northern shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far, far beyond the outmost giant's home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At the chink'd fields of ice, the waste of snow.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he must fare across the dismal ice<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Northward, until he meets a stretching wall<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Barring his way, and in the wall a grate.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But then he must dismount, and on the ice<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tighten the girths of Sleipner, Odin's horse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And make him leap the grate, and come within.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he will see stretch round him Hela's realm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The plains of Niflheim, where dwell the dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hear the roaring of the streams of Hell.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he will see the feeble, shadowy tribes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Balder sitting crown'd, and Hela's throne.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then must he not regard the wailful ghosts<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who all will flit, like eddying leaves, around;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he must straight accost their solemn queen,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And pay her homage, and entreat with prayers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Telling her all that grief they have in Heaven<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For Balder, whom she holds by right below;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If haply he may melt her heart with words,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And make her yield, and give him Balder back."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She spoke; but Hoder answer'd her and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Mother, a dreadful way is this thou show'st;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No journey for a sightless God to go!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And straight the mother of the Gods replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Therefore thyself thou shalt not go, my son.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he whom first thou meetest when thou com'st<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Asgard, and declar'st this hidden way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall go; and I will be his guide unseen."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She spoke, and on her face let fall her veil,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bow'd her head, and sate with folded hands,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_107" id="Page_107">[107]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">But at the central hearth those women old,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who while the Mother spake had ceased their toil,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Began again to heap the sacred fire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hoder turn'd, and left his mother's house,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fensaler, whose lit windows look to sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And came again down to the roaring waves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And back along the beach to Asgard went,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pondering on that which Frea said should be.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But night came down, and darken'd Asgard streets<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then from their loath&eacute;d feasts the Gods arose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lighted torches, and took up the corpse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Balder from the floor of Odin's hall,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And laid it on a bier, and bare him home<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the fast-darkening streets to his own house,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Breidablik, on whose columns Balder graved<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The enchantments that recall the dead to life.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For wise he was, and many curious arts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Postures of runes, and healing herbs he knew;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unhappy! but that art he did not know,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To keep his own life safe, and see the sun.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There to his hall the Gods brought Balder home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And each bespake him as he laid him down:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Would that ourselves, O Balder, we were borne<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Home to our halls, with torchlight, by our kin,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So thou might'st live, and still delight the Gods!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They spake; and each went home to his own house.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But there was one, the first of all the Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For speed, and Hermod was his name in Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Most fleet he was, but now he went the last,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Heavy in heart for Balder, to his house,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which he in Asgard built him, there to dwell,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against the harbour, by the city-wall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Him the blind Hoder met, as he came up<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_108" id="Page_108">[108]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the sea cityward, and knew his step;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor yet could Hermod see his brother's face,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For it grew dark; but Hoder touch'd his arm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as a spray of honeysuckle flowers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Brushes across a tired traveller's face<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who shuffles through the deep dew-moisten'd dust,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On a May evening, in the darken'd lanes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And starts him, that he thinks a ghost went by&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So Hoder brush'd by Hermod's side, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Take Sleipner, Hermod, and set forth with dawn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Hela's kingdom, to ask Balder back;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they shall be thy guides, who have the power."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake, and brush'd soft by, and disappear'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hermod gazed into the night, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Who is it utters through the dark his hest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So quickly, and will wait for no reply?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The voice was like the unhappy Hoder's voice.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Howbeit I will see, and do his hest;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For there rang note divine in that command."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So speaking, the fleet-footed Hermod came<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Home, and lay down to sleep in his own house;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all the Gods lay down in their own homes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hoder too came home, distraught with grief,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Loathing to meet, at dawn, the other Gods;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he went in, and shut the door, and fixt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His sword upright, and fell on it, and died.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But from the hill of Lidskialf Odin rose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The throne, from which his eye surveys the world;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And mounted Sleipner, and in darkness rode<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Asgard. And the stars came out in heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">High over Asgard, to light home the King.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But fiercely Odin gallop'd, moved in heart;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And swift to Asgard, to the gate, he came.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_109" id="Page_109">[109]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And terribly the hoofs of Sleipner rang<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Along the flinty floor of Asgard streets,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the Gods trembled on their golden beds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hearing the wrathful Father coming home&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For dread, for like a whirlwind, Odin came.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to Valhalla's gate he rode, and left<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sleipner; and Sleipner went to his own stall;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in Valhalla Odin laid him down.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But in Breidablik, Nanna, Balder's wife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Came with the Goddesses who wrought her will,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And stood by Balder lying on his bier.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And at his head and feet she station'd Scalds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who in their lives were famous for their song;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These o'er the corpse intoned a plaintive strain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A dirge&mdash;and Nanna and her train replied.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And far into the night they wail'd their dirge.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when their souls were satisfied with wail,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They went, and laid them down, and Nanna went<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into an upper chamber, and lay down;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Frea seal'd her tired lids with sleep.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And 'twas when night is bordering hard on dawn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When air is chilliest, and the stars sunk low;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then Balder's spirit through the gloom drew near,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In garb, in form, in feature as he was,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alive; and still the rays were round his head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which were his glorious mark in Heaven; he stood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over against the curtain of the bed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And gazed on Nanna as she slept, and spake:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Poor lamb, thou sleepest, and forgett'st thy woe!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tears stand upon the lashes of thine eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tears wet the pillow by thy cheek; but thou,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like a young child, hast cried thyself to sleep.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sleep on; I watch thee, and am here to aid.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_110" id="Page_110">[110]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alive I kept not far from thee, dear soul!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Neither do I neglect thee now, though dead.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For with to-morrow's dawn the Gods prepare<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To gather wood, and build a funeral-pile<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon my ship, and burn my corpse with fire,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That sad, sole honour of the dead; and thee<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They think to burn, and all my choicest wealth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With me, for thus ordains the common rite.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But it shall not be so; but mild, but swift,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But painless shall a stroke from Frea come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To cut thy thread of life, and free thy soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they shall burn thy corpse with mine, not thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And well I know that by no stroke of death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tardy or swift, would'st thou be loath to die,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So it restored thee, Nanna, to my side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom thou so well hast loved; but I can smooth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy way, and this, at least, my prayers avail.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yes, and I fain would altogether ward<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Death from thy head, and with the Gods in Heaven<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prolong thy life, though not by thee desired&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But right bars this, not only thy desire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet dreary, Nanna, is the life they lead<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In that dim world, in Hela's mouldering realm;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And doleful are the ghosts, the troops of dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom Hela with austere control presides.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For of the race of Gods is no one there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Save me alone, and Hela, solemn queen;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all the nobler souls of mortal men<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On battle-field have met their death, and now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Feast in Valhalla, in my father's hall;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Only the inglorious sort are there below,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The old, the cowards, and the weak are there&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Men spent by sickness, or obscure decay.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_111" id="Page_111">[111]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">But even there, O Nanna, we might find<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some solace in each other's look and speech,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wandering together through that gloomy world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And talking of the life we led in Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While we yet lived, among the other Gods."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake, and straight his lineaments began<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To fade; and Nanna in her sleep stretch'd out<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her arms towards him with a cry&mdash;but he<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mournfully shook his head, and disappear'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as the woodman sees a little smoke<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hang in the air, afield, and disappear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So Balder faded in the night away.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Nanna on her bed sank back; but then<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Frea, the mother of the Gods, with stroke<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Painless and swift, set free her airy soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which took, on Balder's track, the way below;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And instantly the sacred morn appear'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2"><b>2. JOURNEY TO THE DEAD</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Forth from the east, up the ascent of Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Day drove his courser with the shining mane;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in Valhalla, from his gable-perch,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The golden-crested cock began to crow.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hereafter, in the blackest dead of night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With shrill and dismal cries that bird shall crow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Warning the Gods that foes draw nigh to Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But now he crew at dawn, a cheerful note,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To wake the Gods and Heroes to their tasks.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all the Gods, and all the Heroes, woke.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from their beds the Heroes rose, and donn'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their arms, and led their horses from the stall,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And mounted them, and in Valhalla's court<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_112" id="Page_112">[112]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were ranged; and then the daily fray began.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all day long they there are hack'd and hewn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Mid dust, and groans, and limbs lopp'd off, and blood;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But all at night return to Odin's hall,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Woundless and fresh; such lot is theirs in Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the Valkyries on their steeds went forth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tow'rd earth and fights of men; and at their side<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Skulda, the youngest of the Nornies, rode;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And over Bifrost, where is Heimdall's watch,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Past Midgard fortress, down to earth they came;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There through some battle-field, where men fall fast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their horses fetlock-deep in blood, they ride,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And pick the bravest warriors out for death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom they bring back with them at night to Heaven<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To glad the Gods, and feast in Odin's hall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the Gods went not now, as otherwhile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the tilt-yard, where the Heroes fought,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To feast their eyes with looking on the fray;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor did they to their judgment-place repair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the ash Igdrasil, in Ida's plain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where they hold council, and give laws for men.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But they went, Odin first, the rest behind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the hall Gladheim, which is built of gold;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where are in circle ranged twelve golden chairs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the midst one higher, Odin's throne.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There all the Gods in silence sate them down;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thus the Father of the ages spake:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Go quickly, Gods, bring wood to the seashore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With all, which it beseems the dead to have,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And make a funeral-pile on Balder's ship;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the twelfth day the Gods shall burn his corpse.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Hermod, thou, take Sleipner, and ride down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Hela's kingdom, to ask Balder back."<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_113" id="Page_113">[113]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">So said he; and the Gods arose, and took<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Axes and ropes, and at their head came Thor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shouldering his hammer, which the giants know.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forth wended they, and drave their steeds before.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And up the dewy mountain-tracks they fared<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the dark forests, in the early dawn;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And up and down, and side and slant they roam'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from the glens all day an echo came<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of crashing falls; for with his hammer Thor<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Smote 'mid the rocks the lichen-bearded pines,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And burst their roots, while to their tops the Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Made fast the woven ropes, and haled them down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lopp'd their boughs, and clove them on the sward,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bound the logs behind their steeds to draw,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And drave them homeward; and the snorting steeds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Went straining through the crackling brushwood down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And by the darkling forest-paths the Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Follow'd, and on their shoulders carried boughs.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they came out upon the plain, and pass'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Asgard, and led their horses to the beach,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And loosed them of their loads on the seashore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And ranged the wood in stacks by Balder's ship;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And every God went home to his own house.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when the Gods were to the forest gone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hermod led Sleipner from Valhalla forth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And saddled him; before that, Sleipner brook'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No meaner hand than Odin's on his mane,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On his broad back no lesser rider bore;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet docile now he stood at Hermod's side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Arching his neck, and glad to be bestrode,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Knowing the God they went to seek, how dear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Hermod mounted him, and sadly fared<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In silence up the dark untravell'd road<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_114" id="Page_114">[114]</a></span></span>
<span class="i0">Which branches from the north of Heaven, and went<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All day; and daylight waned, and night came on.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all that night he rode, and journey'd so,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nine days, nine nights, toward the northern ice,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through valleys deep-engulph'd, by roaring streams.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the tenth morn he beheld the bridge<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which spans with golden arches Giall's stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the bridge a damsel watching arm'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the strait passage, at the farther end,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the road issues between walling rocks.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Scant space that warder left for passers by;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But as when cowherds in October drive<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their kine across a snowy mountain-pass<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To winter-pasture on the southern side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the ridge a waggon chokes the way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wedged in the snow; then painfully the hinds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With goad and shouting urge their cattle past,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Plunging through deep untrodden banks of snow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To right and left, and warm steam fills the air&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So on the bridge that damsel block'd the way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And question'd Hermod as he came, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Who art thou on thy black and fiery horse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under whose hoofs the bridge o'er Giall's stream<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rumbles and shakes? Tell me thy race and home.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But yestermorn, five troops of dead pass'd by,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bound on their way below to Hela's realm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor shook the bridge so much as thou alone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou hast flesh and colour on thy cheeks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like men who live, and draw the vital air;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor look'st thou pale and wan, like men deceased,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Souls bound below, my daily passers here."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the fleet-footed Hermod answer'd her:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"O damsel, Hermod am I call'd, the son<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_115" id="Page_115">[115]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Odin; and my high-roof'd house is built<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far hence, in Asgard, in the city of Gods;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Sleipner, Odin's horse, is this I ride.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I come, sent this road on Balder's track;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Say then, if he hath cross'd thy bridge or no?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake; the warder of the bridge replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"O Hermod, rarely do the feet of Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or of the horses of the Gods resound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon my bridge; and, when they cross, I know.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Balder hath gone this way, and ta'en the road<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Below there, to the north, tow'rd Hela's realm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From here the cold white mist can be discern'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor lit with sun, but through the darksome air<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the dim vapour-blotted light of stars,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which hangs over the ice where lies the road.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For in that ice are lost those northern streams,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Freezing and ridging in their onward flow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which from the fountain of Vergelmer run,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The spring that bubbles up by Hela's throne.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There are the joyless seats, the haunt of ghosts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hela's pale swarms; and there was Balder bound.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ride on! pass free! but he by this is there."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She spake, and stepp'd aside, and left him room.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hermod greeted her, and gallop'd by<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Across the bridge; then she took post again.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But northward Hermod rode, the way below;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And o'er a darksome tract, which knows no sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But by the blotted light of stars, he fared.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he came down to Ocean's northern strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At the drear ice, beyond the giants' home.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thence on he journey'd o'er the fields of ice<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still north, until he met a stretching wall<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Barring his way, and in the wall a grate.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_116" id="Page_116">[116]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then he dismounted, and drew tight the girths,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the smooth ice, of Sleipner, Odin's horse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And made him leap the grate, and came within.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he beheld spread round him Hela's realm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The plains of Niflheim, where dwell the dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And heard the thunder of the streams of Hell.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For near the wall the river of Roaring flows,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Outmost; the others near the centre run&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Storm, the Abyss, the Howling, and the Pain;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These flow by Hela's throne, and near their spring.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from the dark flock'd up the shadowy tribes;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as the swallows crowd the bulrush-beds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of some clear river, issuing from a lake,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On autumn-days, before they cross the sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to each bulrush-crest a swallow hangs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Quivering, and others skim the river-streams,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And their quick twittering fills the banks and shores&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So around Hermod swarm'd the twittering ghosts.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Women, and infants, and young men who died<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Too soon for fame, with white ungraven shields;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And old men, known to glory, but their star<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Betray'd them, and of wasting age they died,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not wounds; yet, dying, they their armour wore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now have chief regard in Hela's realm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behind flock'd wrangling up a piteous crew,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Greeted of none, disfeatured and forlorn&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cowards, who were in sloughs interr'd alive;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And round them still the wattled hurdles hung,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wherewith they stamp'd them down, and trod them deep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To hide their shameful memory from men.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But all he pass'd unhail'd, and reach'd the throne<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Hela, and saw, near it, Balder crown'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hela set thereon, with countenance stern<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_117" id="Page_117">[117]</a></span>;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thus bespake him first the solemn queen:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Unhappy, how hast thou endured to leave<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The light, and journey to the cheerless land<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where idly flit about the feeble shades?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How didst thou cross the bridge o'er Giall's stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Being alive, and come to Ocean's shore?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or how o'erleap the grate that bars the wall?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She spake: but down off Sleipner Hermod sprang,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fell before her feet, and clasp'd her knees;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And spake, and mild entreated her, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"O Hela, wherefore should the Gods declare<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their errands to each other, or the ways<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They go? the errand and the way is known.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou know'st, thou know'st, what grief we have in Heaven<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For Balder, whom thou hold'st by right below.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Restore him! for what part fulfils he here?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall he shed cheer over the cheerless seats,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And touch the apathetic ghosts with joy?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not for such end, O queen, thou hold'st thy realm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For Heaven was Balder born, the city of Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Heroes, where they live in light and joy.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thither restore him, for his place is there!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; and grave replied the solemn queen:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Hermod, for he thou art, thou son of Heaven!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A strange unlikely errand, sure, is thine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do the Gods send to me to make them blest?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Small bliss my race hath of the Gods obtained.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Three mighty children to my father Lok<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Did Angerbode, the giantess, bring forth&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fenris the wolf, the Serpent huge, and me.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of these the Serpent in the sea ye cast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who since in your despite hath wax'd amain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now with gleaming ring enfolds the world;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_118" id="Page_118">[118]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Me on this cheerless nether world ye threw,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And gave me nine unlighted realms to rule;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While on his island in the lake afar,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Made fast to the bored crag, by wile not strength<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Subdued, with limber chains lives Fenris bound.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lok still subsists in Heaven, our father wise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Your mate, though loathed, and feasts in Odin's hall;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But him too foes await, and netted snares,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in a cave a bed of needle-rocks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And o'er his visage serpents dropping gall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet he shall one day rise, and burst his bonds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with himself set us his offspring free,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When he guides Muspel's children to their bourne.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till then in peril or in pain we live,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wrought by the Gods&mdash;and ask the Gods our aid?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Howbeit, we abide our day; till then,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We do not as some feebler haters do&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seek to afflict our foes with petty pangs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Helpless to better us, or ruin them.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come then! if Balder was so dear beloved,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And this is true, and such a loss is Heaven's&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hear, how to Heaven may Balder be restored.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Show me through all the world the signs of grief!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fails but one thing to grieve, here Balder stops!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let all that lives and moves upon the earth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Weep him, and all that is without life weep;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let Gods, men, brutes, beweep him; plants and stones!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So shall I know the lost was dear indeed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bend my heart, and give him back to Heaven."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She spake; and Hermod answer'd her, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Hela, such as thou say'st, the terms shall be.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But come, declare me this, and truly tell:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May I, ere I depart, bid Balder hail,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_119" id="Page_119">[119]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or is it here withheld to greet the dead?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake, and straightway Hela answered him:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Hermod, greet Balder if thou wilt, and hold<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Converse; his speech remains, though he be dead."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And straight to Balder Hermod turn'd, and spake:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Even in the abode of death, O Balder, hail!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou hear'st, if hearing, like as speech, is thine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The terms of thy releasement hence to Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fear nothing but that all shall be fulfill'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For not unmindful of thee are the Gods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who see the light, and blest in Asgard dwell;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even here they seek thee out, in Hela's realm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And sure of all the happiest far art thou<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who ever have been known in earth or Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alive, thou wast of Gods the most beloved,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now thou sittest crown'd by Hela's side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here, and hast honour among all the dead."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake; and Balder utter'd him reply,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But feebly, as a voice far off; he said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Hermod the nimble, gild me not my death!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Better to live a serf, a captured man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who scatters rushes in a master's hall,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than be a crown'd king here, and rule the dead.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now I count not of these terms as safe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To be fulfill'd, nor my return as sure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though I be loved, and many mourn my death;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For double-minded ever was the seed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Lok, and double are the gifts they give.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Howbeit, report thy message; and therewith,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Odin, to my father, take this ring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Memorial of me, whether saved or no;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And tell the Heaven-born Gods how thou hast seen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Me sitting here below by Hela's side,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_120" id="Page_120">[120]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crown'd, having honour among all the dead."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake, and raised his hand, and gave the ring.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with inscrutable regard the queen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Hell beheld them, and the ghosts stood dumb.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Hermod took the ring, and yet once more<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Kneel'd and did homage to the solemn queen;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then mounted Sleipner, and set forth to ride<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Back, through the astonish'd tribes of dead, to Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to the wall he came, and found the grate<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lifted, and issued on the fields of ice.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And o'er the ice he fared to Ocean's strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And up from thence, a wet and misty road,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the arm'd damsel's bridge, and Giall's stream.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Worse was that way to go than to return,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For him;&mdash;for others all return is barr'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nine days he took to go, two to return,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the twelfth morn saw the light of Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as a traveller in the early dawn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the steep edge of some great valley comes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through which a river flows, and sees, beneath,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clouds of white rolling vapours fill the vale,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But o'er them, on the farther slope, descries<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vineyards, and crofts, and pastures, bright with sun&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So Hermod, o'er the fog between, saw Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Sleipner snorted, for he smelt the air<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Heaven; and mightily, as wing'd, he flew.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hermod saw the towers of Asgard rise;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he drew near, and heard no living voice<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Asgard; and the golden halls were dumb.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then Hermod knew what labour held the Gods;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And through the empty streets he rode, and pass'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the gate-house to the sands, and found<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Gods on the sea-shore by Balder's ship.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_121" id="Page_121">[121]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>3. FUNERAL</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The Gods held talk together, group'd in knots,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Round Balder's corpse, which they had thither borne;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hermod came down tow'rds them from the gate.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Lok, the father of the serpent, first<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beheld him come, and to his neighbour spake:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"See, here is Hermod, who comes single back<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From Hell; and shall I tell thee how he seems?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like as a farmer, who hath lost his dog,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some morn, at market, in a crowded town&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through many streets the poor beast runs in vain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And follows this man after that, for hours;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, late at evening, spent and panting, falls<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before a stranger's threshold, not his home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With flanks a-tremble, and his slender tongue<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hangs quivering out between his dust-smear'd jaws,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And piteously he eyes the passers by;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But home his master comes to his own farm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far in the country, wondering where he is&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So Hermod comes to-day unfollow'd home."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And straight his neighbour, moved with wrath, replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Deceiver! fair in form, but false in heart!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Enemy, mocker, whom, though Gods, we hate&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Peace, lest our father Odin hear thee gibe!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would I might see him snatch thee in his hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bind thy carcase, like a bale, with cords,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hurl thee in a lake, to sink or swim!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If clear from plotting Balder's death, to swim;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But deep, if thou devisedst it, to drown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And perish, against fate, before thy day."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So they two soft to one another spake.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Odin look'd toward the land, and saw<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_122" id="Page_122">[122]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">His messenger; and he stood forth, and cried.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hermod came, and leapt from Sleipner down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in his father's hand put Sleipner's rein,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And greeted Odin and the Gods, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Odin, my father, and ye, Gods of Heaven!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lo, home, having perform'd your will, I come.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the joyless kingdom have I been,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Below, and look'd upon the shadowy tribes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of ghosts, and communed with their solemn queen;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to your prayer she sends you this reply:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Show her through all the world the signs of grief!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Fails but one thing to grieve, there Balder stops!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Let Gods, men, brutes, beweep him; plants and stones:</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>So shall she know your loss was dear indeed,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>And bend her heart, and give you Balder back.</i>"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; and all the Gods to Odin look'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And straight the Father of the ages said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ye Gods, these terms may keep another day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But now, put on your arms, and mount your steeds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in procession all come near, and weep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Balder; for that is what the dead desire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When ye enough have wept, then build a pile<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the heap'd wood, and burn his corpse with fire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Out of our sight; that we may turn from grief,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lead, as erst, our daily life in Heaven."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke, and the Gods arm'd; and Odin donn'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His dazzling corslet and his helm of gold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And led the way on Sleipner; and the rest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Follow'd, in tears, their father and their king.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thrice in arms around the dead they rode,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Weeping; the sands were wetted, and their arms,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With their thick-falling tears&mdash;so good a friend<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They mourn'd that day, so bright, so loved a God.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_123" id="Page_123">[123]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Odin came, and laid his kingly hands<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On Balder's breast, and thus began the wail:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Farewell, O Balder, bright and loved, my son!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In that great day, the twilight of the Gods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When Muspel's children shall beleaguer Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then we shall miss thy counsel and thy arm."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou camest near the next, O warrior Thor!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shouldering thy hammer, in thy chariot drawn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swaying the long-hair'd goats with silver'd rein;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And over Balder's corpse these words didst say:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Brother, thou dwellest in the darksome land,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And talkest with the feeble tribes of ghosts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now, and I know not how they prize thee there&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But here, I know, thou wilt be miss'd and mourn'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For haughty spirits and high wraths are rife<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Among the Gods and Heroes here in Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As among those whose joy and work is war;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And daily strifes arise, and angry words.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But from thy lips, O Balder, night or day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Heard no one ever an injurious word<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To God or Hero, but thou keptest back<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The others, labouring to compose their brawls.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be ye then kind, as Balder too was kind!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For we lose him, who smoothed all strife in Heaven."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake, and all the Gods assenting wail'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Freya next came nigh, with golden tears;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The loveliest Goddess she in Heaven, by all<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Most honour'd after Frea, Odin's wife.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her long ago the wandering Oder took<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To mate, but left her to roam distant lands;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Since then she seeks him, and weeps tears of gold.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Names hath she many; Vanadis on earth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They call her, Freya is her name in Heaven;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_124" id="Page_124">[124]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">She in her hands took Balder's head, and spake:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Balder, my brother, thou art gone a road<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unknown and long, and haply on that way<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My long-lost wandering Oder thou hast met,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For in the paths of Heaven he is not found.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oh, if it be so, tell him what thou wast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To his neglected wife, and what he is,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wring his heart with shame, to hear thy word!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For he, my husband, left me here to pine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not long a wife, when his unquiet heart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First drove him from me into distant lands;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Since then I vainly seek him through the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And weep from shore to shore my golden tears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But neither god nor mortal heeds my pain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou only, Balder, wast for ever kind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To take my hand, and wipe my tears, and say:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Weep not, O Freya, weep no golden tears!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>One day the wandering Oder will return,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Or thou wilt find him in thy faithful search</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>On some great road, or resting in an inn,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Or at a ford, or sleeping by a tree.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">So Balder said;&mdash;but Oder, well I know,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My truant Oder I shall see no more<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the world's end; and Balder now is gone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I am left uncomforted in Heaven."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She spake; and all the Goddesses bewail'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Last from among the Heroes one came near,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No God, but of the hero-troop the chief&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Regner, who swept the northern sea with fleets,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And ruled o'er Denmark and the heathy isles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Living; but Ella captured him and slew;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A king whose fame then fill'd the vast of Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now time obscures it, and men's later deeds.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_125" id="Page_125">[125]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">He last approach'd the corpse, and spake, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Balder, there yet are many Scalds in Heaven<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still left, and that chief Scald, thy brother Brage,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom we may bid to sing, though thou art gone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all these gladly, while we drink, we hear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">After the feast is done, in Odin's hall;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But they harp ever on one string, and wake<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Remembrance in our soul of wars alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Such as on earth we valiantly have waged,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And blood, and ringing blows, and violent death.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when thou sangest, Balder, thou didst strike<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Another note, and, like a bird in spring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy voice of joyance minded us, and youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wife, and children, and our ancient home.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yes, and I, too, remember'd then no more<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My dungeon, where the serpents stung me dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor Ella's victory on the English coast&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But I heard Thora laugh in Gothland Isle,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And saw my shepherdess, Aslauga, tend<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her flock along the white Norwegian beach.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tears started to mine eyes with yearning joy.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Therefore with grateful heart I mourn thee dead."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So Regner spake, and all the Heroes groan'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But now the sun had pass'd the height of Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And soon had all that day been spent in wail;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But then the Father of the ages said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ye Gods, there well may be too much of wail!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bring now the gather'd wood to Balder's ship;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Heap on the deck the logs, and build the pyre."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when the Gods and Heroes heard, they brought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The wood to Balder's ship, and built a pile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Full the deck's breadth, and lofty; then the corpse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Balder on the highest top they laid,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_126" id="Page_126">[126]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">With Nanna on his right, and on his left<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hoder, his brother, whom his own hand slew.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they set jars of wine and oil to lean<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against the bodies, and stuck torches near,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Splinters of pine-wood, soak'd with turpentine;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And brought his arms and gold, and all his stuff,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And slew the dogs who at his table fed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his horse, Balder's horse, whom most he loved,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And placed them on the pyre, and Odin threw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A last choice gift thereon, his golden ring.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mast they fixt, and hoisted up the sails,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then they put fire to the wood; and Thor<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Set his stout shoulder hard against the stern<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To push the ship through the thick sand;&mdash;sparks flew<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the deep trench she plough'd, so strong a God<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Furrow'd it; and the water gurgled in.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the ship floated on the waves, and rock'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But in the hills a strong east-wind arose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And came down moaning to the sea; first squalls<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ran black o'er the sea's face, then steady rush'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The breeze, and fill'd the sails, and blew the fire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wreathed in smoke the ship stood out to sea.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soon with a roaring rose the mighty fire,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the pile crackled; and between the logs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sharp quivering tongues of flame shot out, and leapt,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Curling and darting, higher, until they lick'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The summit of the pile, the dead, the mast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And ate the shrivelling sails; but still the ship<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Drove on, ablaze above her hull with fire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the Gods stood upon the beach, and gazed.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And while they gazed, the sun went lurid down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the smoke-wrapt sea, and night came on.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then the wind fell, with night, and there was calm;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_127" id="Page_127">[127]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">But through the dark they watch'd the burning ship<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still carried o'er the distant waters on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Farther and farther, like an eye of fire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And long, in the far dark, blazed Balder's pile;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But fainter, as the stars rose high, it flared,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The bodies were consumed, ash choked the pile.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as, in a decaying winter-fire,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A charr'd log, falling, makes a shower of sparks&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So with a shower of sparks the pile fell in,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Reddening the sea around; and all was dark.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the Gods went by starlight up the shore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Asgard, and sate down in Odin's hall<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At table, and the funeral-feast began.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All night they ate the boar Serimner's flesh,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from their horns, with silver rimm'd, drank mead,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Silent, and waited for the sacred morn.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And morning over all the world was spread.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then from their loath&eacute;d feasts the Gods arose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And took their horses, and set forth to ride<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er the bridge Bifrost, where is Heimdall's watch,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the ash Igdrasil, and Ida's plain;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thor came on foot, the rest on horseback rode.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they found Mimir sitting by his fount<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of wisdom, which beneath the ashtree springs;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And saw the Nornies watering the roots<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of that world-shadowing tree with honey-dew.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There came the Gods, and sate them down on stones;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thus the Father of the ages said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ye Gods, the terms ye know, which Hermod brought.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Accept them or reject them! both have grounds.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Accept them, and they bind us, unfulfill'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To leave for ever Balder in the grave,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An unrecover'd prisoner, shade with shades.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_128" id="Page_128">[128]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">But how, ye say, should the fulfilment fail?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Smooth sound the terms, and light to be fulfill'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For dear-beloved was Balder while he lived<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Heaven and earth, and who would grudge him tears?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But from the traitorous seed of Lok they come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These terms, and I suspect some hidden fraud.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bethink ye, Gods, is there no other way?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Speak, were not this a way, the way for Gods?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If I, if Odin, clad in radiant arms,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mounted on Sleipner, with the warrior Thor<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Drawn in his car beside me, and my sons,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All the strong brood of Heaven, to swell my train,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Should make irruption into Hela's realm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And set the fields of gloom ablaze with light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bring in triumph Balder back to Heaven?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake, and his fierce sons applauded loud.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Frea, mother of the Gods, arose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Daughter and wife of Odin; thus she said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Odin, thou whirlwind, what a threat is this!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou threatenest what transcends thy might, even thine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For of all powers the mightiest far art thou,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lord over men on earth, and Gods in Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet even from thee thyself hath been withheld<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One thing&mdash;to undo what thou thyself hast ruled.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For all which hath been fixt, was fixt by thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the beginning, ere the Gods were born,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before the Heavens were builded, thou didst slay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The giant Ymir, whom the abyss brought forth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou and thy brethren fierce, the sons of Bor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And cast his trunk to choke the abysmal void.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But of his flesh and members thou didst build<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The earth and Ocean, and above them Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from the flaming world, where Muspel reigns,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_129" id="Page_129">[129]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou sent'st and fetched'st fire, and madest lights,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sun, moon, and stars, which thou hast hung in Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dividing clear the paths of night and day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Asgard thou didst build, and Midgard fort;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then me thou mad'st; of us the Gods were born.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Last, walking by the sea, thou foundest spars<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of wood, and framed'st men, who till the earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or on the sea, the field of pirates, sail.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all the race of Ymir thou didst drown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Save one, Bergelmer;&mdash;he on shipboard fled<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy deluge, and from him the giants sprang.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But all that brood thou hast removed far off,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And set by Ocean's utmost marge to dwell;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Hela into Niflheim thou threw'st,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And gav'st her nine unlighted worlds to rule,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A queen, and empire over all the dead.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That empire wilt thou now invade, light up<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her darkness, from her grasp a subject tear?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Try it; but I, for one, will not applaud.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor do I merit, Odin, thou should'st slight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Me and my words, though thou be first in Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For I too am a Goddess, born of thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thine eldest, and of me the Gods are sprung;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all that is to come I know, but lock<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In mine own breast, and have to none reveal'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come then! since Hela holds by right her prey,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But offers terms for his release to Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Accept the chance; thou canst no more obtain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Send through the world thy messengers; entreat<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All living and unliving things to weep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For Balder; if thou haply thus may'st melt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hela, and win the loved one back to Heaven."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She spake, and on her face let fall her veil,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_130" id="Page_130">[130]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bow'd her head, and sate with folded hands.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor did the all-ruling Odin slight her word;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Straightway he spake, and thus address'd the Gods:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Go quickly forth through all the world, and pray<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All living and unliving things to weep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Balder, if haply he may thus be won."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the Gods heard, they straight arose, and took<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their horses, and rode forth through all the world;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">North, south, east, west, they struck, and roam'd the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Entreating all things to weep Balder's death.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all that lived, and all without life, wept.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as in winter, when the frost breaks up,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At winter's end, before the spring begins,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And a warm west-wind blows, and thaw sets in&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">After an hour a dripping sound is heard<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In all the forests, and the soft-strewn snow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the trees is dibbled-thick with holes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from the boughs the snowloads shuffle down;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, in fields sloping to the south, dark plots<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of grass peep out amid surrounding snow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And widen, and the peasant's heart is glad&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So through the world was heard a dripping noise<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of all things weeping to bring Balder back;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And there fell joy upon the Gods to hear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Hermod rode with Niord, whom he took<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To show him spits and beaches of the sea<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far off, where some unwarn'd might fail to weep&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Niord, the God of storms, whom fishers know;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not born in Heaven; he was in Vanheim rear'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With men, but lives a hostage with the Gods;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He knows each frith, and every rocky creek<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fringed with dark pines, and sands where seafowl scream&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They two scour'd every coast, and all things wept.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_131" id="Page_131">[131]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they rode home together, through the wood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Jarnvid, which to east of Midgard lies<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bordering the giants, where the trees are iron;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There in the wood before a cave they came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where sate, in the cave's mouth, a skinny hag,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Toothless and old; she gibes the passers by.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thok is she call'd, but now Lok wore her shape;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She greeted them the first, and laugh'd, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ye Gods, good lack, is it so dull in Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That ye come pleasuring to Thok's iron wood?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lovers of change ye are, fastidious sprites.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Look, as in some boor's yard a sweet-breath'd cow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose manger is stuff'd full of good fresh hay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Snuffs at it daintily, and stoops her head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To chew the straw, her litter, at her feet&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So ye grow squeamish, Gods, and sniff at Heaven!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She spake; but Hermod answer'd her and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Thok, not for gibes we come, we come for tears.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Balder is dead, and Hela holds her prey,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But will restore, if all things give him tears.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Begrudge not thine! to all was Balder dear."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, with a louder laugh, the hag replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Is Balder dead? and do ye come for tears?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thok with dry eyes will weep o'er Balder's pyre.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Weep him all other things, if weep they will&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I weep him not! let Hela keep her prey."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She spake, and to the cavern's depth she fled,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mocking; and Hermod knew their toil was vain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as seafaring men, who long have wrought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the great deep for gain, at last come home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And towards evening see the headlands rise<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of their dear country, and can plain descry<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A fire of wither'd furze which boys have lit<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_132" id="Page_132">[132]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the cliffs, or smoke of burning weeds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Out of a till'd field inland;&mdash;then the wind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Catches them, and drives out again to sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they go long days tossing up and down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the grey sea-ridges, and the glimpse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of port they had makes bitterer far their toil&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So the Gods' cross was bitterer for their joy.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, sad at heart, to Niord Hermod spake:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"It is the accuser Lok, who flouts us all!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ride back, and tell in Heaven this heavy news;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I must again below, to Hela's realm."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; and Niord set forth back to Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But northward Hermod rode, the way below,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The way he knew; and traversed Giall's stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And down to Ocean groped, and cross'd the ice,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And came beneath the wall, and found the grate<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still lifted; well was his return foreknown.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And once more Hermod saw around him spread<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The joyless plains, and heard the streams of Hell.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But as he enter'd, on the extremest bound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Niflheim, he saw one ghost come near,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hovering, and stopping oft, as if afraid&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hoder, the unhappy, whom his own hand slew.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hermod look'd, and knew his brother's ghost,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And call'd him by his name, and sternly said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Hoder, ill-fated, blind in heart and eyes!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why tarriest thou to plunge thee in the gulph<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the deep inner gloom, but flittest here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In twilight, on the lonely verge of Hell,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far from the other ghosts, and Hela's throne?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Doubtless thou fearest to meet Balder's voice,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy brother, whom through folly thou didst slay."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke; but Hoder answer'd him, and said:<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_133" id="Page_133">[133]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Hermod the nimble, dost thou still pursue<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The unhappy with reproach, even in the grave?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For this I died, and fled beneath the gloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not daily to endure abhorring Gods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor with a hateful presence cumber Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And canst thou not, even here, pass pitying by?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No less than Balder have I lost the light<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Heaven, and communion with my kin;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I too had once a wife, and once a child,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And substance, and a golden house in Heaven&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But all I left of my own act, and fled<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Below, and dost thou hate me even here?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Balder upbraids me not, nor hates at all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though he has cause, have any cause; but he,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When that with downcast looks I hither came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stretch'd forth his hand, and with benignant voice,<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Welcome</i>, he said, <i>if there be welcome here,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Brother and fellow-sport of Lok with me!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And not to offend thee, Hermod, nor to force<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My hated converse on thee, came I up<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the deep gloom, where I will now return;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But earnestly I long'd to hover near,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not too far off, when that thou camest by;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To feel the presence of a brother God,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hear the passage of a horse of Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the last time&mdash;for here thou com'st no more."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake, and turn'd to go to the inner gloom.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Hermod stay'd him with mild words, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Thou doest well to chide me, Hoder blind!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Truly thou say'st, the planning guilty mind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was Lok's; the unwitting hand alone was thine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Gods are like the sons of men in this&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When they have woe, they blame the nearest cause.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_134" id="Page_134">[134]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Howbeit stay, and be appeased! and tell:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sits Balder still in pomp by Hela's side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or is he mingled with the unnumber'd dead?"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the blind Hoder answer'd him and spake:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"His place of state remains by Hela's side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But empty; for his wife, for Nanna came<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lately below, and join'd him; and the pair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Frequent the still recesses of the realm<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Hela, and hold converse undisturb'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But they too, doubtless, will have breathed the balm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which floats before a visitant from Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And have drawn upward to this verge of Hell."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake; and, as he ceased, a puff of wind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Roll'd heavily the leaden mist aside<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Round where they stood, and they beheld two forms<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Make toward them o'er the stretching cloudy plain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hermod straight perceived them, who they were<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Balder and Nanna; and to Balder said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Balder, too truly thou foresaw'st a snare!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lok triumphs still, and Hela keeps her prey.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No more to Asgard shalt thou come, nor lodge<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In thy own house, Breidablik, nor enjoy<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The love all bear toward thee, nor train up<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forset, thy son, to be beloved like thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here must thou lie, and wait an endless age.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Therefore for the last time, O Balder, hail!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake; and Balder answer'd him, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Hail and farewell! for here thou com'st no more.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet mourn not for me, Hermod, when thou sitt'st<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Heaven, nor let the other Gods lament,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As wholly to be pitied, quite forlorn.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For Nanna hath rejoin'd me, who, of old,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Heaven, was seldom parted from my side;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_135" id="Page_135">[135]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And still the acceptance follows me, which crown'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My former life, and cheers me even here.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The iron frown of Hela is relax'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When I draw nigh, and the wan tribes of dead<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Love me, and gladly bring for my award<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their ineffectual feuds and feeble hates&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shadows of hates, but they distress them still."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the fleet-footed Hermod made reply:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Thou hast then all the solace death allows,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Esteem and function; and so far is well.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet here thou liest, Balder, underground,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rusting for ever; and the years roll on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The generations pass, the ages grow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bring us nearer to the final day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When from the south shall march the fiery band<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And cross the bridge of Heaven, with Lok for guide,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Fenris at his heel with broken chain;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While from the east the giant Rymer steers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His ship, and the great serpent makes to land;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all are marshall'd in one flaming square<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against the Gods, upon the plains of Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I mourn thee, that thou canst not help us then."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake; but Balder answer'd him, and said:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Mourn not for me! Mourn, Hermod, for the Gods;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mourn for the men on earth, the Gods in Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who live, and with their eyes shall see that day!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The day will come, when fall shall Asgard's towers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Odin, and his sons, the seed of Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But what were I, to save them in that hour?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If strength might save them, could not Odin save,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My father, and his pride, the warrior Thor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vidar the silent, the impetuous Tyr?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I, what were I, when these can nought avail?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_136" id="Page_136">[136]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet, doubtless, when the day of battle comes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the two hosts are marshall'd, and in Heaven<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The golden-crested cock shall sound alarm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his black brother-bird from hence reply,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bucklers clash, and spears begin to pour&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Longing will stir within my breast, though vain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But not to me so grievous, as, I know,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To other Gods it were, is my enforced<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Absence from fields where I could nothing aid;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For I am long since weary of your storm<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of carnage, and find, Hermod, in your life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Something too much of war and broils, which make<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Life one perpetual fight, a bath of blood.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mine eyes are dizzy with the arrowy hail;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mine ears are stunn'd with blows, and sick for calm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Inactive therefore let me lie, in gloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unarm'd, inglorious; I attend the course<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of ages, and my late return to light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In times less alien to a spirit mild,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In new-recover'd seats, the happier day."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spake; and the fleet Hermod thus replied:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Brother, what seats are these, what happier day?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tell me, that I may ponder it when gone."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the ray-crowned Balder answer'd him:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Far to the south, beyond the blue, there spreads<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Another Heaven, the boundless&mdash;no one yet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hath reach'd it; there hereafter shall arise<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The second Asgard, with another name.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thither, when o'er this present earth and Heavens<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The tempest of the latter days hath swept,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they from sight have disappear'd, and sunk,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall a small remnant of the Gods repair;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hoder and I shall join them from the grave.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_137" id="Page_137">[137]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">There re-assembling we shall see emerge<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the bright Ocean at our feet an earth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More fresh, more verdant than the last, with fruits<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Self-springing, and a seed of man preserved,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who then shall live in peace, as now in war.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But we in Heaven shall find again with joy<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The ruin'd palaces of Odin, seats<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Familiar, halls where we have supp'd of old;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Re-enter them with wonder, never fill<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our eyes with gazing, and rebuild with tears.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we shall tread once more the well-known plain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Ida, and among the grass shall find<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The golden dice wherewith we play'd of yore;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that will bring to mind the former life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And pastime of the Gods, the wise discourse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Odin, the delights of other days,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Hermod, pray that thou may'st join us then!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Such for the future is my hope; meanwhile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I rest the thrall of Hela, and endure<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Death, and the gloom which round me even now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thickens, and to its inner gulph recalls.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Farewell, for longer speech is not allow'd!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He spoke, and waved farewell, and gave his hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Nanna; and she gave their brother blind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her hand, in turn, for guidance; and the three<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Departed o'er the cloudy plain, and soon<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Faded from sight into the interior gloom.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Hermod stood beside his drooping horse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mute, gazing after them in tears; and fain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fain had he follow'd their receding steps,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though they to death were bound, and he to Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then; but a power he could not break withheld.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as a stork which idle boys have trapp'd,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_138" id="Page_138">[138]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And tied him in a yard, at autumn sees<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flocks of his kind pass flying o'er his head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To warmer lands, and coasts that keep the sun;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He strains to join their flight, and from his shed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Follows them with a long complaining cry&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So Hermod gazed, and yearn'd to join his kin.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">At last he sigh'd, and set forth back to Heaven.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="TRISTRAM_AND_ISEULT8" id="TRISTRAM_AND_ISEULT8"></a>TRISTRAM AND ISEULT<a name="FNanchor_8_10" id="FNanchor_8_10"></a><a href="#Footnote_8_10" class="fnanchor">[8]</a></h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><b>I</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>Tristram</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Is she not come? The messenger was sure.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prop me upon the pillows once again&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Raise me, my page! this cannot long endure.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Christ, what a night! how the sleet whips the pane!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What lights will those out to the northward be?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Page</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The lanterns of the fishing-boats at sea.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Soft&mdash;who is that, stands by the dying fire?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Page</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Iseult.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Ah! not the Iseult I desire.<br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_139" id="Page_139">[139]</a></span></span>
<span class="i0">What Knight is this so weak and pale,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though the locks are yet brown on his noble head,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Propt on pillows in his bed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gazing seaward for the light<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of some ship that fights the gale<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On this wild December night?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the sick man's feet is spread<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A dark green forest-dress;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A gold harp leans against the bed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ruddy in the fire's light.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know him by his harp of gold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Famous in Arthur's court of old;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know him by his forest-dress&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The peerless hunter, harper, knight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tristram of Lyoness.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What Lady is this, whose silk attire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gleams so rich in the light of the fire?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The ringlets on her shoulders lying<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In their flitting lustre vying<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With the clasp of burnish'd gold<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which her heavy robe doth hold.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her looks are mild, her fingers slight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As the driven snow are white;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But her cheeks are sunk and pale.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is it that the bleak sea-gale<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beating from the Atlantic sea<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On this coast of Brittany,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nips too keenly the sweet flower?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is it that a deep fatigue<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hath come on her, a chilly fear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Passing all her youthful hour<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Spinning with her maidens here,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_140" id="Page_140">[140]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Listlessly through the window-bars<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gazing seawards many a league,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From her lonely shore-built tower,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While the knights are at the wars?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or, perhaps, has her young heart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Felt already some deeper smart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of those that in secret the heart-strings rive,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Leaving her sunk and pale, though fair?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who is this snowdrop by the sea?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know her by her mildness rare,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her snow-white hands, her golden hair;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know her by her rich silk dress,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And her fragile loveliness&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sweetest Christian soul alive,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Iseult of Brittany.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Iseult of Brittany?&mdash;but where<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is that other Iseult fair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That proud, first Iseult, Cornwall's queen?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She, whom Tristram's ship of yore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From Ireland to Cornwall bore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Tyntagel, to the side<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of King Marc, to be his bride?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She who, as they voyaged, quaff'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With Tristram that spiced magic draught,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which since then for ever rolls<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through their blood, and binds their souls,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Working love, but working teen?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There were two Iseults who did sway<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Each her hour of Tristram's day;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But one possess'd his waning time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The other his resplendent prime.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behold her here, the patient flower,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_141" id="Page_141">[141]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who possess'd his darker hour!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Iseult of the Snow-White Hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Watches pale by Tristram's bed.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She is here who had his gloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where art thou who hadst his bloom?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One such kiss as those of yore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might thy dying knight restore!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Does the love-draught work no more?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Art thou cold, or false, or dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Iseult of Ireland?<br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Loud howls the wind, sharp patters the rain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the knight sinks back on his pillows again.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He is weak with fever and pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his spirit is not clear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hark! he mutters in his sleep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As he wanders far from here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Changes place and time of year,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his clos&eacute;d eye doth sweep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er some fair unwintry sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not this fierce Atlantic deep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While he mutters brokenly:&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The calm sea shines, loose hang the vessel's sails;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before us are the sweet green fields of Wales,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And overhead the cloudless sky of May.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>"Ah, would I were in those green fields at play,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Not pent on ship-board this delicious day!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Tristram, I pray thee, of thy courtesy,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Reach me my golden phial stands by thee,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>But pledge me in it first for courtesy</i>.&mdash;"<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_142" id="Page_142">[142]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ha! dost thou start? are thy lips blanch'd like mine?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Child, 'tis no true draught this, 'tis poison'd wine!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Iseult!...<br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah, sweet angels, let him dream!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Keep his eyelids! let him seem<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not this fever-wasted wight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thinn'd and paled before his time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the brilliant youthful knight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the glory of his prime,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sitting in the gilded barge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At thy side, thou lovely charge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bending gaily o'er thy hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Iseult of Ireland!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And she too, that princess fair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If her bloom be now less rare,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let her have her youth again&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let her be as she was then!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let her have her proud dark eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And her petulant quick replies&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let her sweep her dazzling hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With its gesture of command,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And shake back her raven hair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With the old imperious air!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As of old, so let her be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That first Iseult, princess bright,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Chatting with her youthful knight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As he steers her o'er the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Quitting at her father's will<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The green isle where she was bred,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And her bower in Ireland,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the surge-beat Cornish strand;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_143" id="Page_143">[143]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the prince whom she must wed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dwells on loud Tyntagel's hill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">High above the sounding sea.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that potion rare her mother<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gave her, that her future lord,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gave her, that King Marc and she,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might drink it on their marriage-day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And for ever love each other&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let her, as she sits on board,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah, sweet saints, unwittingly!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">See it shine, and take it up,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to Tristram laughing say:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Sir Tristram, of thy courtesy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pledge me in my golden cup!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let them drink it&mdash;let their hands<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tremble, and their cheeks be flame,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As they feel the fatal bands<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of a love they dare not name,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With a wild delicious pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Twine about their hearts again!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let the early summer be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once more round them, and the sea<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blue, and o'er its mirror kind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let the breath of the May-wind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wandering through their drooping sails,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Die on the green fields of Wales!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let a dream like this restore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What his eye must see no more!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Chill blows the wind, the pleasaunce-walks are drear&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Madcap, what jest was this, to meet me here?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were feet like those made for so wild a way?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_144" id="Page_144">[144]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The southern winter-parlour, by my fay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had been the likeliest trysting-place to-day!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"<i>Tristram!&mdash;nay, nay&mdash;thou must not take my hand!&mdash;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Tristram!&mdash;sweet love!&mdash;we are betray'd&mdash;out-plann'd.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Fly&mdash;save thyself&mdash;save me!&mdash;I dare not stay."&mdash;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">One last kiss first!&mdash;"<i>'Tis vain&mdash;to horse&mdash;away!</i>"<br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah! sweet saints, his dream doth move<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Faster surely than it should,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the fever in his blood!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All the spring-time of his love<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is already gone and past,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And instead thereof is seen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Its winter, which endureth still&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tyntagel on its surge-beat hill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The pleasaunce-walks, the weeping queen,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The flying leaves, the straining blast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that long, wild kiss&mdash;their last.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And this rough December-night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his burning fever-pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mingle with his hurrying dream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till they rule it, till he seem<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The press'd fugitive again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The love-desperate banish'd knight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With a fire in his brain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flying o'er the stormy main.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Whither does he wander now?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Haply in his dreams the wind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wafts him here, and lets him find<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The lovely orphan child again<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In her castle by the coast;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The youngest, fairest chatelaine,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_145" id="Page_145">[145]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom this realm of France can boast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our snowdrop by the Atlantic sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Iseult of Brittany.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And&mdash;for through the haggard air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The stain'd arms, the matted hair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of that stranger-knight ill-starr'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There gleam'd something, which recall'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Tristram who in better days<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was Launcelot's guest at Joyous Gard&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Welcomed here, and here install'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tended of his fever here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Haply he seems again to move<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His young guardian's heart with love;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In his exiled loneliness,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In his stately, deep distress,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Without a word, without a tear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Ah! 'tis well he should retrace<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His tranquil life in this lone place;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His gentle bearing at the side<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of his timid youthful bride;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His long rambles by the shore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On winter-evenings, when the roar<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the near waves came, sadly grand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the dark, up the drown'd sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or his endless reveries<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the woods, where the gleams play<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the grass under the trees,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Passing the long summer's day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Idle as a mossy stone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the forest-depths alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The chase neglected, and his hound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Couch'd beside him on the ground.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Ah! what trouble's on his brow?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_146" id="Page_146">[146]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hither let him wander now;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hither, to the quiet hours<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pass'd among these heaths of ours<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the grey Atlantic sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hours, if not of ecstasy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From violent anguish surely free!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">All red with blood the whirling river flows,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The wide plain rings, the dazed air throbs with blows.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon us are the chivalry of Rome&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their spears are down, their steeds are bathed in foam.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Up, Tristram, up," men cry, "thou moonstruck knight!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What foul fiend rides thee? On into the fight!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Above the din her voice is in my ears;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I see her form glide through the crossing spears.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Iseult!...<br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah! he wanders forth again;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We cannot keep him; now, as then,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There's a secret in his breast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which will never let him rest.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These musing fits in the green wood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They cloud the brain, they dull the blood!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;His sword is sharp, his horse is good;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beyond the mountains will he see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The famous towns of Italy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And label with the blessed sign<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The heathen Saxons on the Rhine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At Arthur's side he fights once more<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With the Roman Emperor.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_147" id="Page_147">[147]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">There's many a gay knight where he goes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will help him to forget his care;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The march, the leaguer, Heaven's blithe air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The neighing steeds, the ringing blows&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sick pining comes not where these are.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah! what boots it, that the jest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lightens every other brow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What, that every other breast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dances as the trumpets blow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If one's own heart beats not light<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the waves of the toss'd fight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If oneself cannot get free<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the clog of misery?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy lovely youthful wife grows pale<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Watching by the salt sea-tide<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With her children at her side<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the gleam of thy white sail.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Home, Tristram, to thy halls again!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To our lonely sea complain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To our forests tell thy pain!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">All round the forest sweeps off, black in shade,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But it is moonlight in the open glade;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the bottom of the glade shine clear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The forest-chapel and the fountain near.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;I think, I have a fever in my blood;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, let me leave the shadow of this wood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ride down, and bathe my hot brow in the flood.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Mild shines the cold spring in the moon's clear light;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">God! 'tis <i>her</i> face plays in the waters bright.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Fair love," she says, "canst thou forget so soon,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_148" id="Page_148">[148]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">At this soft hour, under this sweet moon?"&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Iseult!...<br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah, poor soul! if this be so,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Only death can balm thy woe.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The solitudes of the green wood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had no medicine for thy mood;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The rushing battle clear'd thy blood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As little as did solitude.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Ah! his eyelids slowly break<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their hot seals, and let him wake;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What new change shall we now see?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A happier? Worse it cannot be.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Is my page here? Come, turn me to the fire!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the window-panes the moon shines bright;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The wind is down&mdash;but she'll not come to-night.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah no! she is asleep in Cornwall now,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far hence; her dreams are fair&mdash;smooth is her brow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of me she recks not, nor my vain desire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;I have had dreams, I have had dreams, my page,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would take a score years from a strong man's age;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with a blood like mine, will leave, I fear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Scant leisure for a second messenger.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;My princess, art thou there? Sweet, do not wait!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To bed, and sleep! my fever is gone by;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To-night my page shall keep me company.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where do the children sleep? kiss them for me!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Poor child, thou art almost as pale as I;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This comes of nursing long and watching late.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To bed&mdash;good night!<br /></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_149" id="Page_149">[149]</a></span></span>
<span class="i0">She left the gleam-lit fireplace,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She came to the bed-side;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She took his hands in hers&mdash;her tears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down on his wasted fingers rain'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She raised her eyes upon his face&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not with a look of wounded pride,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A look as if the heart complained&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her look was like a sad embrace;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The gaze of one who can divine<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A grief, and sympathise.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sweet flower! thy children's eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are not more innocent than thine.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But they sleep in shelter'd rest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like helpless birds in the warm nest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the castle's southern side;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where feebly comes the mournful roar<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of buffeting wind and surging tide<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through many a room and corridor.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Full on their window the moon's ray<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Makes their chamber as bright as day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It shines upon the blank white walls,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the snowy pillow falls,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on two angel-heads doth play<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Turn'd to each other&mdash;the eyes closed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The lashes on the cheeks reposed.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Round each sweet brow the cap close-set<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hardly lets peep the golden hair;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the soft-open'd lips the air<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Scarcely moves the coverlet.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One little wandering arm is thrown<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At random on the counterpane,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And often the fingers close in haste<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As if their baby-owner chased<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_150" id="Page_150">[150]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The butterflies again.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This stir they have, and this alone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But else they are so still!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Ah, tired madcaps! you lie still;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But were you at the window now,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To look forth on the fairy sight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of your illumined haunts by night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To see the park-glades where you play<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far lovelier than they are by day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To see the sparkle on the eaves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And upon every giant-bough<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of those old oaks, whose wet red leaves<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are jewell'd with bright drops of rain&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How would your voices run again!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And far beyond the sparkling trees<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the castle-park one sees<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The bare heaths spreading, clear as day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Moor behind moor, far, far away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the heart of Brittany.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And here and there, lock'd by the land,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Long inlets of smooth glittering sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And many a stretch of watery sand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All shining in the white moon-beams&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But you see fairer in your dreams!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What voices are these on the clear night-air?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What lights in the court&mdash;what steps on the stair?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><b>II</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4"><b>Iseult of Ireland</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Raise the light, my page! that I may see her.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou art come at last, then, haughty Queen!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_151" id="Page_151">[151]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Long I've waited, long I've fought my fever;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Late thou comest, cruel thou hast been.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Iseult</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Blame me not, poor sufferer! that I tarried;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bound I was, I could not break the band.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Chide not with the past, but feel the present!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I am here&mdash;we meet&mdash;I hold thy hand.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou art come, indeed&mdash;thou hast rejoin'd me;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou hast dared it&mdash;but too late to save.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fear not now that men should tax thine honour!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I am dying: build&mdash;(thou may'st)&mdash;my grave!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Iseult</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Tristram, ah, for love of Heaven, speak kindly!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What, I hear these bitter words from thee?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sick with grief I am, and faint with travel&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Take my hand&mdash;dear Tristram, look on me!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I forgot, thou comest from thy voyage&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yes, the spray is on thy cloak and hair.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thy dark eyes are not dimm'd, proud Iseult!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thy beauty never was more fair.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Iseult</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah, harsh flatterer! let alone my beauty!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I, like thee, have left my youth afar.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Take my hand, and touch these wasted fingers&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">See my cheek and lips, how white they are!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_152" id="Page_152">[152]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou art paler&mdash;but thy sweet charm, Iseult!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would not fade with the dull years away.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah, how fair thou standest in the moonlight!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I forgive thee, Iseult!&mdash;thou wilt stay?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Iseult</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Fear me not, I will be always with thee;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I will watch thee, tend thee, soothe thy pain;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sing thee tales of true, long-parted lovers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Join'd at evening of their days again.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No, thou shalt not speak! I should be finding<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Something alter'd in thy courtly tone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sit&mdash;sit by me! I will think, we've lived so<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the green wood, all our lives, alone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Iseult</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Alter'd, Tristram? Not in courts, believe me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Love like mine is alter'd in the breast;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Courtly life is light and cannot reach it&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah! it lives, because so deep-suppress'd!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What, thou think'st men speak in courtly chambers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Words by which the wretched are consoled?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What, thou think'st this aching brow was cooler,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Circled, Tristram, by a band of gold?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Royal state with Marc, my deep-wrong'd husband&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That was bliss to make my sorrows flee!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Silken courtiers whispering honied nothings&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Those were friends to make me false to thee!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_153" id="Page_153">[153]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah, on which, if both our lots were balanced,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was indeed the heaviest burden thrown&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thee, a pining exile in thy forest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Me, a smiling queen upon my throne?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Vain and strange debate, where both have suffer'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Both have pass'd a youth consumed and sad,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Both have brought their anxious day to evening,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And have now short space for being glad!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Join'd we are henceforth; nor will thy people,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor thy younger Iseult take it ill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That a former rival shares her office,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When she sees her humbled, pale, and still.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I, a faded watcher by thy pillow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I, a statue on thy chapel-floor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pour'd in prayer before the Virgin-Mother,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rouse no anger, make no rivals more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">She will cry: "Is this the foe I dreaded?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This his idol? this that royal bride?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah, an hour of health would purge his eyesight!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stay, pale queen! for ever by my side."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hush, no words! that smile, I see, forgives me.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I am now thy nurse, I bid thee sleep.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Close thine eyes&mdash;this flooding moonlight blinds them!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nay, all's well again! thou must not weep.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I am happy! yet I feel, there's something<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swells my heart, and takes my breath away.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through a mist I see thee; near&mdash;come nearer!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bend&mdash;bend down!&mdash;I yet have much to say.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_154" id="Page_154">[154]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Iseult</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Heaven! his head sinks back upon the pillow&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tristram! Tristram! let thy heart not fail!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Call on God and on the holy angels!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What, love, courage!&mdash;Christ! he is so pale.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Tristram</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hush, 'tis vain, I feel my end approaching!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This is what my mother said should be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the fierce pains took her in the forest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The deep draughts of death, in bearing me.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Son," she said, "thy name shall be of sorrow;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tristram art thou call'd for my death's sake."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So she said, and died in the drear forest.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Grief since then his home with me doth make.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I am dying.&mdash;Start not, nor look wildly!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Me, thy living friend, thou canst not save.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, since living we were ununited,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Go not far, O Iseult! from my grave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Close mine eyes, then seek the princess Iseult;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Speak her fair, she is of royal blood!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Say, I will'd so, that thou stay beside me&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She will grant it; she is kind and good.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Now to sail the seas of death I leave thee&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One last kiss upon the living shore!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Iseult</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Tristram!&mdash;Tristram!&mdash;stay&mdash;receive me with thee!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Iseult leaves thee, Tristram! never more.<br /></span><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_155" id="Page_155">[155]</a></span>
</div></div>
<hr style="poem0" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">You see them clear&mdash;the moon shines bright.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Slow, slow and softly, where she stood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She sinks upon the ground;&mdash;her hood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had fallen back; her arms outspread<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still hold her lover's hand; her head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is bow'd, half-buried, on the bed.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er the blanch'd sheet her raven hair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lies in disorder'd streams; and there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Strung like white stars, the pearls still are,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the golden bracelets, heavy and rare,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flash on her white arms still.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The very same which yesternight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flash'd in the silver sconces' light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the feast was gay and the laughter loud<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Tyntagel's palace proud.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But then they deck'd a restless ghost<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With hot-flush'd cheeks and brilliant eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And quivering lips on which the tide<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of courtly speech abruptly died,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And a glance which over the crowded floor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The dancers, and the festive host,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flew ever to the door.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That the knights eyed her in surprise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the dames whispered scoffingly:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Her moods, good lack, they pass like showers!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But yesternight and she would be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As pale and still as wither'd flowers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now to-night she laughs and speaks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And has a colour in her cheeks;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Christ keep us from such fantasy!"&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes, now the longing is o'erpast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which, dogg'd by fear and fought by shame,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_156" id="Page_156">[156]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shook her weak bosom day and night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Consumed her beauty like a flame,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And dimm'd it like the desert-blast.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And though the bed-clothes hide her face,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet were it lifted to the light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sweet expression of her brow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would charm the gazer, till his thought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Erased the ravages of time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fill'd up the hollow cheek, and brought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A freshness back as of her prime&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So healing is her quiet now.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So perfectly the lines express<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A tranquil, settled loveliness,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her younger rival's purest grace.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The air of the December-night<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Steals coldly around the chamber bright,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where those lifeless lovers be;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swinging with it, in the light<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flaps the ghostlike tapestry.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the arras wrought you see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A stately Huntsman, clad in green,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And round him a fresh forest-scene.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On that clear forest-knoll he stays,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With his pack round him, and delays.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He stares and stares, with troubled face,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At this huge, gleam-lit fireplace,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At that bright, iron-figured door,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And those blown rushes on the floor.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He gazes down into the room<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With heated cheeks and flurried air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to himself he seems to say:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"<i>What place is this, and who are they?</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_157" id="Page_157">[157]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Who is that kneeling Lady fair?</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>And on his pillows that pale Knight</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Who seems of marble on a tomb?</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>How comes it here, this chamber bright,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Through whose mullion'd windows clear</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The castle-court all wet with rain,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The drawbridge and the moat appear,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>And then the beach, and, mark'd with spray,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The sunken reefs, and far away</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The unquiet bright Atlantic plain?</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>&mdash;What, has some glamour made me sleep,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>And sent me with my dogs to sweep,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>By night, with boisterous bugle-peal,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Through some old, sea-side, knightly hall,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Not in the free green wood at all?</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>That Knight's asleep, and at her prayer</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>That Lady by the bed doth kneel&mdash;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Then hush, thou boisterous bugle-peal!</i>"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;The wild boar rustles in his lair;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fierce hounds snuff the tainted air;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But lord and hounds keep rooted there.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Cheer, cheer thy dogs into the brake,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Hunter! and without a fear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy golden-tassell'd bugle blow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And through the glades thy pastime take&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For thou wilt rouse no sleepers here!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For these thou seest are unmoved;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cold, cold as those who lived and loved<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A thousand years ago.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_158" id="Page_158">[158]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>III</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4"><b>Iseult of Brittany</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">A year had flown, and o'er the sea away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Cornwall, Tristram and Queen Iseult lay;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In King Marc's chapel, in Tyntagel old&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There in a ship they bore those lovers cold.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The young surviving Iseult, one bright day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had wander'd forth. Her children were at play<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In a green circular hollow in the heath<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which borders the sea-shore&mdash;a country path<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Creeps over it from the till'd fields behind.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hollow's grassy banks are soft-inclined,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to one standing on them, far and near<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The lone unbroken view spreads bright and clear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the waste. This cirque of open ground<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is light and green; the heather, which all round<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Creeps thickly, grows not here; but the pale grass<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is strewn with rocks, and many a shiver'd mass<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of vein'd white-gleaming quartz, and here and there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dotted with holly-trees and juniper.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the smooth centre of the opening stood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Three hollies side by side, and made a screen,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Warm with the winter-sun, of burnish'd green<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With scarlet berries gemm'd, the fell-fare's food.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the glittering hollies Iseult stands,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Watching her children play; their little hands<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are busy gathering spars of quartz, and streams<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of stagshorn for their hats; anon, with screams<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of mad delight they drop their spoils, and bound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Among the holly-clumps and broken ground,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Racing full speed, and startling in their rush<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_159" id="Page_159">[159]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fell-fares and the speckled missel-thrush<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Out of their glossy coverts;&mdash;but when now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their cheeks were flush'd, and over each hot brow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the feather'd hats of the sweet pair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In blinding masses shower'd the golden hair&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then Iseult call'd them to her, and the three<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cluster'd under the holly-screen, and she<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Told them an old-world Breton history.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Warm in their mantles wrapt the three stood there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the hollies, in the clear still air&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mantles with those rich furs deep glistering<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which Venice ships do from swart Egypt bring.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Long they stay'd still&mdash;then, pacing at their ease,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Moved up and down under the glossy trees.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But still, as they pursued their warm dry road,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From Iseult's lips the unbroken story flow'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And still the children listen'd, their blue eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fix'd on their mother's face in wide surprise;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor did their looks stray once to the sea-side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor to the brown heaths round them, bright and wide,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor to the snow, which, though 't was all away<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the open heath, still by the hedgerows lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor to the shining sea-fowl, that with screams<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bore up from where the bright Atlantic gleams,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swooping to landward; nor to where, quite clear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fell-fares settled on the thickets near.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they would still have listen'd, till dark night<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Came keen and chill down on the heather bright;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, when the red glow on the sea grew cold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the grey turrets of the castle old<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Look'd sternly through the frosty evening-air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then Iseult took by the hand those children fair,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_160" id="Page_160">[160]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And brought her tale to an end, and found the path,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And led them home over the darkening heath.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And is she happy? Does she see unmoved<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The days in which she might have lived and loved<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Slip without bringing bliss slowly away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One after one, to-morrow like to-day?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Joy has not found her yet, nor ever will&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is it this thought which makes her mien so still,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her features so fatigued, her eyes, though sweet,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So sunk, so rarely lifted save to meet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her children's? She moves slow; her voice alone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hath yet an infantine and silver tone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But even that comes languidly; in truth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She seems one dying in a mask of youth.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now she will go home, and softly lay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her laughing children in their beds, and play<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Awhile with them before they sleep; and then<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She'll light her silver lamp, which fishermen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dragging their nets through the rough waves, afar,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Along this iron coast, know like a star,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And take her broidery-frame, and there she'll sit<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hour after hour, her gold curls sweeping it;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lifting her soft-bent head only to mind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her children, or to listen to the wind.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And when the clock peals midnight, she will move<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her work away, and let her fingers rove<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Across the shaggy brows of Tristram's hound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who lies, guarding her feet, along the ground;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or else she will fall musing, her blue eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fixt, her slight hands clasp'd on her lap; then rise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And at her prie-dieu kneel, until she have told<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her rosary-beads of ebony tipp'd with gold,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_161" id="Page_161">[161]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then to her soft sleep&mdash;and to-morrow 'll be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To-day's exact repeated effigy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes, it is lonely for her in her hall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The children, and the grey-hair'd seneschal,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her women, and Sir Tristram's aged hound,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are there the sole companions to be found.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But these she loves; and noisier life than this<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She would find ill to bear, weak as she is.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She has her children, too, and night and day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is with them; and the wide heaths where they play,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hollies, and the cliff, and the sea-shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sand, the sea-birds, and the distant sails,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These are to her dear as to them; the tales<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With which this day the children she beguiled<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She gleaned from Breton grandames, when a child,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In every hut along this sea-coast wild.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She herself loves them still, and, when they are told,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Can forget all to hear them, as of old.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Dear saints, it is not sorrow, as I hear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not suffering, which shuts up eye and ear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To all that has delighted them before,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lets us be what we were once no more.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No, we may suffer deeply, yet retain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Power to be moved and soothed, for all our pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By what of old pleased us, and will again.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No, 'tis the gradual furnace of the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In whose hot air our spirits are upcurl'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Until they crumble, or else grow like steel&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which kills in us the bloom, the youth, the spring&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which leaves the fierce necessity to feel,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But takes away the power&mdash;this can avail,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By drying up our joy in everything,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_162" id="Page_162">[162]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">To make our former pleasures all seem stale.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This, or some tyrannous single thought, some fit<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of passion, which subdues our souls to it,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till for its sake alone we live and move&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Call it ambition, or remorse, or love&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This too can change us wholly, and make seem<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All which we did before, shadow and dream.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And yet, I swear, it angers me to see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How this fool passion gulls men potently;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Being, in truth, but a diseased unrest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And an unnatural overheat at best.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How they are full of languor and distress<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not having it; which when they do possess,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They straightway are burnt up with fume and care,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And spend their lives in posting here and there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where this plague drives them; and have little ease,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are furious with themselves, and hard to please.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like that bold C&aelig;sar, the famed Roman wight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who wept at reading of a Grecian knight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who made a name at younger years than he;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or that renown'd mirror of chivalry,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prince Alexander, Philip's peerless son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who carried the great war from Macedon<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the Soudan's realm, and thundered on<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To die at thirty-five in Babylon.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What tale did Iseult to the children say,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the hollies, that bright winter's day?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">She told them of the fairy-haunted land<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Away the other side of Brittany,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beyond the heaths, edged by the lonely sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the deep forest-glades of Broce-liande,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_163" id="Page_163">[163]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through whose green boughs the golden sunshine creeps,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where Merlin by the enchanted thorn-tree sleeps.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For here he came with the fay Vivian,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One April, when the warm days first began.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He was on foot, and that false fay, his friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On her white palfrey; here he met his end,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In these lone sylvan glades, that April-day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This tale of Merlin and the lovely fay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was the one Iseult chose, and she brought clear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before the children's fancy him and her.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Blowing between the stems, the forest-air<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had loosen'd the brown locks of Vivian's hair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which play'd on her flush'd cheek, and her blue eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sparkled with mocking glee and exercise.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her palfrey's flanks were mired and bathed in sweat,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For they had travell'd far and not stopp'd yet.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A brier in that tangled wilderness<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had scored her white right hand, which she allows<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To rest ungloved on her green riding-dress;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The other warded off the drooping boughs.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But still she chatted on, with her blue eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fix'd full on Merlin's face, her stately prize.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her 'haviour had the morning's fresh clear grace,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The spirit of the woods was in her face.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She look'd so witching fair, that learned wight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forgot his craft, and his best wits took flight;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he grew fond, and eager to obey<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His mistress, use her empire as she may.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">They came to where the brushwood ceased, and day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Peer'd 'twixt the stems; and the ground broke away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In a sloped sward down to a brawling brook;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And up as high as where they stood to look<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_164" id="Page_164">[164]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the brook's farther side was clear, but then<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The underwood and trees began again.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This open glen was studded thick with thorns<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then white with blossom; and you saw the horns,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through last year's fern, of the shy fallow-deer<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who come at noon down to the water here.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">You saw the bright-eyed squirrels dart along<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the thorns on the green sward; and strong<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The blackbird whistled from the dingles near,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the weird chipping of the woodpecker<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rang lonelily and sharp; the sky was fair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And a fresh breath of spring stirr'd everywhere.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Merlin and Vivian stopp'd on the slope's brow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To gaze on the light sea of leaf and bough<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which glistering plays all round them, lone and mild,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As if to itself the quiet forest smiled.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the brow-top grew a thorn, and here<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The grass was dry and moss'd, and you saw clear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Across the hollow; white anemonies<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Starr'd the cool turf, and clumps of primroses<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ran out from the dark underwood behind.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No fairer resting-place a man could find.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Here let us halt," said Merlin then; and she<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nodded, and tied her palfrey to a tree.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">They sate them down together, and a sleep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fell upon Merlin, more like death, so deep.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her finger on her lips, then Vivian rose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from her brown-lock'd head the wimple throws,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And takes it in her hand, and waves it over<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The blossom'd thorn-tree and her sleeping lover.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nine times she waved the fluttering wimple round,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And made a little plot of magic ground.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_165" id="Page_165">[165]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in that daised circle, as men say,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is Merlin prisoner till the judgment-day;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But she herself whither she will can rove&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For she was passing weary of his love.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="SAINT_BRANDAN" id="SAINT_BRANDAN"></a>SAINT BRANDAN</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Saint Brandan sails the northern main;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The brotherhoods of saints are glad.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He greets them once, he sails again;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So late!&mdash;such storms!&mdash;The Saint is mad!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He heard, across the howling seas,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Chime convent-bells on wintry nights;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He saw, on spray-swept Hebrides,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Twinkle the monastery-lights.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But north, still north, Saint Brandan steer'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And now no bells, no convents more!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The hurtling Polar lights are near'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The sea without a human shore.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">At last&mdash;(it was the Christmas night;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stars shone after a day of storm)&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He sees float past an iceberg white,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And on it&mdash;Christ!&mdash;a living form.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">That furtive mien, that scowling eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of hair that red and tufted fell&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It is&mdash;Oh, where shall Brandan fly?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The traitor Judas, out of hell!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Palsied with terror, Brandan sate;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The moon was bright, the iceberg near.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He hears a voice sigh humbly: "Wait!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By high permission I am here.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_166" id="Page_166">[166]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"One moment wait, thou holy man!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On earth my crime, my death, they knew;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My name is under all men's ban&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, tell them of my respite too!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Tell them, one blessed Christmas-night&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">(It was the first after I came,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Breathing self-murder, frenzy, spite,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To rue my guilt in endless flame)&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"I felt, as I in torment lay<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Mid the souls plagued by heavenly power,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">An angel touch mine arm, and say:<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Go hence and cool thyself an hour!</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'Ah, whence this mercy, Lord?' I said.<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>The Leper recollect</i>, said he,<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Who ask'd the passers-by for aid,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>In Joppa, and thy charity.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Then I remember'd how I went,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In Joppa, through the public street,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">One morn when the sirocco spent<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its storms of dust with burning heat;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"And in the street a leper sate,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shivering with fever, naked, old;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sand raked his sores from heel to pate,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The hot wind fever'd him five-fold.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"He gazed upon me as I pass'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And murmur'd: <i>Help me, or I die!</i>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the poor wretch my cloak I cast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Saw him look eased, and hurried by.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Oh, Brandan, think what grace divine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What blessing must full goodness shower,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_167" id="Page_167">[167]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">When fragment of it small, like mine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath such inestimable power!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Well-fed, well-clothed, well-friended, I<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Did that chance act of good, that one!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then went my way to kill and lie&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Forgot my good as soon as done.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"That germ of kindness, in the womb<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of mercy caught, did not expire;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Outlives my guilt, outlives my doom,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And friends me in the pit of fire.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Once every year, when carols wake,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On earth, the Christmas-night's repose,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Arising from the sinners' lake,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I journey to these healing snows.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"I stanch with ice my burning breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With silence balm my whirling brain.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O Brandan! to this hour of rest<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That Joppan leper's ease was pain."&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Tears started to Saint Brandan's eyes;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He bow'd his head, he breathed a prayer&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then look'd, and lo, the frosty skies!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The iceberg, and no Judas there!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_NECKAN" id="THE_NECKAN"></a>THE NECKAN</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In summer, on the headlands,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The Baltic Sea along,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sits Neckan with his harp of gold,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And sings his plaintive song.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_168" id="Page_168">[168]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Green rolls beneath the headlands,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Green rolls the Baltic Sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And there, below the Neckan's feet,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">His wife and children be.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He sings not of the ocean,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Its shells and roses pale;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of earth, of earth the Neckan sings,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">He hath no other tale.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He sits upon the headlands,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And sings a mournful stave<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of all he saw and felt on earth<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Far from the kind sea-wave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Sings how, a knight, he wander'd<br /></span>
<span class="i4">By castle, field, and town&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But earthly knights have harder hearts<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Than the sea-children own.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Sings of his earthly bridal&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Priest, knights, and ladies gay.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"&mdash;And who art thou," the priest began,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">"Sir Knight, who wedd'st to-day?"&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"&mdash;I am no knight," he answered;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">"From the sea-waves I come."&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The knights drew sword, the ladies scream'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The surpliced priest stood dumb.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He sings how from the chapel<br /></span>
<span class="i4">He vanish'd with his bride,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And bore her down to the sea-halls,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Beneath the salt sea-tide.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He sings how she sits weeping<br /></span>
<span class="i4">'Mid shells that round her lie.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_169" id="Page_169">[169]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">"&mdash;False Neckan shares my bed," she weeps;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">"No Christian mate have I."&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He sings how through the billows<br /></span>
<span class="i4">He rose to earth again,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And sought a priest to sign the cross,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">That Neckan Heaven might gain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He sings how, on an evening,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Beneath the birch-trees cool,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He sate and play'd his harp of gold,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Beside the river-pool.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Beside the pool sate Neckan&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Tears fill'd his mild blue eye.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On his white mule, across the bridge,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">A cassock'd priest rode by.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"&mdash;Why sitt'st thou there, O Neckan,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And play'st thy harp of gold?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sooner shall this my staff bear leaves,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Than thou shalt Heaven behold."&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But, lo, the staff, it budded!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">It green'd, it branch'd, it waved.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"&mdash;O ruth of God," the priest cried out,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">"This lost sea-creature saved!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The cassock'd priest rode onwards,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And vanished with his mule;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But Neckan in the twilight grey<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Wept by the river-pool.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He wept: "The earth hath kindness,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The sea, the starry poles;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Earth, sea, and sky, and God above&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">But, ah, not human souls!"<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_170" id="Page_170">[170]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In summer, on the headlands,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The Baltic Sea along,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sits Neckan with his harp of gold,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And sings this plaintive song.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_FORSAKEN_MERMAN" id="THE_FORSAKEN_MERMAN"></a>THE FORSAKEN MERMAN</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Come, dear children, let us away;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down and away below!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now my brothers call from the bay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now the great winds shoreward blow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now the salt tides seaward flow;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now the wild white horses play,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Champ and chafe and toss in the spray.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Children dear, let us away!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This way, this way!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Call her once before you go&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Call once yet!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In a voice that she will know:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Margaret! Margaret!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Children's voices should be dear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(Call once more) to a mother's ear;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Children's voices, wild with pain&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Surely she will come again!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Call her once and come away;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This way, this way!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Mother dear, we cannot stay!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The wild white horses foam and fret."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Margaret! Margaret!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Come, dear children, come away down;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Call no more!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_171" id="Page_171">[171]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">One last look at the white-wall'd town,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the little grey church on the windy shore;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then come down!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She will not come though you call all day;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come away, come away!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Children dear, was it yesterday<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We heard the sweet bells over the bay?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the caverns where we lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the surf and through the swell,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The far-off sound of a silver bell?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sand-strewn caverns, cool and deep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the winds are all asleep;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the spent lights quiver and gleam,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the salt weed sways in the stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the sea-beasts, ranged all round,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Feed in the ooze of their pasture-ground;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the sea-snakes coil and twine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dry their mail and bask in the brine;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where great whales come sailing by,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sail and sail, with unshut eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Round the world for ever and aye?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When did music come this way?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Children dear, was it yesterday?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Children dear, was it yesterday<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(Call yet once) that she went away?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once she sate with you and me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On a red gold throne in the heart of the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the youngest sate on her knee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She comb'd its bright hair, and she tended it well,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When down swung the sound of a far-off bell.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She sigh'd, she look'd up through the clear green sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She said: "I must go, for my kinsfolk pray<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_172" id="Page_172">[172]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the little grey church on the shore to-day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Twill be Easter-time in the world&mdash;ah me!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I lose my poor soul, Merman! here with thee."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I said: "Go up, dear heart, through the waves;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Say thy prayer, and come back to the kind sea-caves!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She smiled, she went up through the surf in the bay.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Children dear, was it yesterday?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Children dear, were we long alone?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"The sea grows stormy, the little ones moan;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Long prayers," I said, "in the world they say;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come!" I said: and we rose through the surf in the bay.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We went up the beach, by the sandy down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the sea-stocks bloom, to the white-wall'd town;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the narrow paved streets, where all was still,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the little grey church on the windy hill.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the church came a murmur of folk at their prayers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But we stood without in the cold blowing airs.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We climb'd on the graves, on the stones worn with rains,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we gazed up the aisle through the small leaded panes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She sate by the pillar; we saw her clear:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Margaret, hist! come quick, we are here!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dear heart," I said, "we are long alone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sea grows stormy, the little ones moan."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, ah, she gave me never a look,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For her eyes were seal'd to the holy book!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Loud prays the priest; shut stands the door.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come away, children, call no more!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come away, come down, call no more!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Down, down, down!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down to the depths of the sea!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She sits at her wheel in the humming town,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_173" id="Page_173">[173]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Singing most joyfully.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hark what she sings: "O joy, O joy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the humming street, and the child with its toy!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the priest, and the bell, and the holy well;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the wheel where I spun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the blessed light of the sun!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And so she sings her fill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Singing most joyfully,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till the spindle drops from her hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the whizzing wheel stands still.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She steals to the window, and looks at the sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And over the sand at the sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And her eyes are set in a stare;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And anon there breaks a sigh,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And anon there drops a tear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From a sorrow-clouded eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And a heart sorrow-laden,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A long, long sigh;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the cold strange eyes of a little Mermaiden<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the gleam of her golden hair.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Come away, away children;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come children, come down!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hoarse wind blows coldly;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lights shine in the town.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She will start from her slumber<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When gusts shake the door;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She will hear the winds howling,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will hear the waves roar.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We shall see, while above us<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The waves roar and whirl,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A ceiling of amber,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A pavement of pearl.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_174" id="Page_174">[174]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Singing: "Here came a mortal,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But faithless was she!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And alone dwell for ever<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The kings of the sea."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But, children, at midnight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When soft the winds blow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When clear falls the moonlight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When spring tides are low;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When sweet airs come seaward<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From heaths starr'd with broom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And high rocks throw mildly<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the blanch'd sands a gloom;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Up the still, glistening beaches,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Up the creeks we will hie,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over banks of bright seaweed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The ebb-tide leaves dry.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We will gaze, from the sand-hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At the white, sleeping town;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At the church on the hill-side&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then come back down.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Singing: "There dwells a loved one,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But cruel is she!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She left lonely for ever<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The kings of the sea."</span>
</div></div>


<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_175" id="Page_175">[175]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2>SONNETS</h2>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_176" id="Page_176">[176]</a></span></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_177" id="Page_177">[177]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="AUSTERITY_OF_POETRY" id="AUSTERITY_OF_POETRY"></a>AUSTERITY OF POETRY</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That son of Italy who tried to blow,<a name="FNanchor_9_11" id="FNanchor_9_11"></a><a href="#Footnote_9_11" class="fnanchor">[9]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ere Dante came, the trump of sacred song,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In his light youth amid a festal throng<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sate with his bride to see a public show.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Fair was the bride, and on her front did glow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Youth like a star; and what to youth belong&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gay raiment, sparkling gauds, elation strong.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A prop gave way! crash fell a platform! lo,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">'Mid struggling sufferers, hurt to death, she lay!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shuddering, they drew her garments off&mdash;and found<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A robe of sackcloth next the smooth, white skin.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Such, poets, is your bride, the Muse! young, gay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Radiant, adorn'd outside; a hidden ground<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of thought and of austerity within.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="A_PICTURE_AT_NEWSTEAD" id="A_PICTURE_AT_NEWSTEAD"></a>A PICTURE AT NEWSTEAD</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What made my heart, at Newstead, fullest swell?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Twas not the thought of Byron, of his cry<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stormily sweet, his Titan-agony;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It was the sight of that Lord Arundel<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_178" id="Page_178">[178]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Who struck, in heat, his child he loved so well,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And his child's reason flicker'd, and did die.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Painted (he will'd it) in the gallery<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They hang; the picture doth the story tell.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Behold the stern, mail'd father, staff in hand!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The little fair-hair'd son, with vacant gaze,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where no more lights of sense or knowledge are!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Methinks the woe, which made that father stand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Baring his dumb remorse to future days,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was woe than Byron's woe more tragic far.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="RACHEL" id="RACHEL"></a>RACHEL</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><b>I</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In Paris all look'd hot and like to fade.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sere, in the garden of the Tuileries,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sere with September, droop'd the chestnut-trees.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Twas dawn; a brougham roll'd through the streets and made<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Halt at the white and silent colonnade<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the French Theatre. Worn with disease,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rachel, with eyes no gazing can appease,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sate in the brougham and those blank walls survey'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">She follows the gay world, whose swarms have fled<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Switzerland, to Baden, to the Rhine;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why stops she by this empty play-house drear?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah, where the spirit its highest life hath led,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All spots, match'd with that spot, are less divine;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Rachel's Switzerland, her Rhine, is here!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_179" id="Page_179">[179]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><b>II</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Unto a lonely villa, in a dell<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Above the fragrant warm Proven&ccedil;al shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The dying Rachel in a chair they bore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Up the steep pine-plumed paths of the Estrelle,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And laid her in a stately room, where fell<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The shadow of a marble Muse of yore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The rose-crown'd queen of legendary lore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Polymnia, full on her death-bed.&mdash;'Twas well!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The fret and misery of our northern towns,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In this her life's last day, our poor, our pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our jangle of false wits, our climate's frowns,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Do for this radiant Greek-soul'd artist cease;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sole object of her dying eyes remain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The beauty and the glorious art of Greece.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><b>III</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sprung from the blood of Israel's scatter'd race,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At a mean inn in German Aarau born,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To forms from antique Greece and Rome uptorn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Trick'd out with a Parisian speech and face,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Imparting life renew'd, old classic grace;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, soothing with thy Christian strain forlorn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A-Kempis! her departing soul outworn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While by her bedside Hebrew rites have place&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah, not the radiant spirit of Greece alone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She had&mdash;one power, which made her breast its home!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In her, like us, there clash'd, contending powers,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_180" id="Page_180">[180]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Germany, France, Christ, Moses, Athens, Rome.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The strife, the mixture in her soul, are ours;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her genius and her glory are her own.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="WORLDLY_PLACE" id="WORLDLY_PLACE"></a>WORLDLY PLACE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2"><i>Even in a palace, life may be led well!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">So spake the imperial sage, purest of men,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Marcus Aurelius. But the stifling den<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of common life, where, crowded up pell-mell,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Our freedom for a little bread we sell,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And drudge under some foolish master's ken<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who rates us if we peer outside our pen&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Match'd with a palace, is not this a hell?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2"><i>Even in a palace!</i> On his truth sincere,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who spoke these words, no shadow ever came;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And when my ill-school'd spirit is aflame<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Some nobler, ampler stage of life to win,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I'll stop, and say: "There were no succour here!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The aids to noble life are all within."<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="EAST_LONDON" id="EAST_LONDON"></a>EAST LONDON</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">'Twas August, and the fierce sun overhead<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Smote on the squalid streets of Bethnal Green,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the pale weaver, through his windows seen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Spitalfields, look'd thrice dispirited.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I met a preacher there I knew, and said:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ill and o'erwork'd, how fare you in this scene?"<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_181" id="Page_181">[181]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Bravely!" said he; "for I of late have been<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Much cheer'd with thoughts of Christ, <i>the living bread</i>."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O human soul! as long as thou canst so<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Set up a mark of everlasting light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Above the howling senses' ebb and flow,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">To cheer thee, and to right thee if thou roam&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not with lost toil thou labourest through the night!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou mak'st the heaven thou hop'st indeed thy home.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="WEST_LONDON" id="WEST_LONDON"></a>WEST LONDON</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Crouch'd on the pavement, close by Belgrave Square,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A tramp I saw, ill, moody, and tongue-tied.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A babe was in her arms, and at her side<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A girl; their clothes were rags, their feet were bare.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Some labouring men, whose work lay somewhere there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pass'd opposite; she touch'd her girl, who hied<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Across, and begg'd, and came back satisfied.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The rich she had let pass with frozen stare.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thought I: "Above her state this spirit towers;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She will not ask of aliens, but of friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of sharers in a common human fate.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"She turns from that cold succour, which attends<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The unknown little from the unknowing great,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And points us to a better time than ours."<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="EAST_AND_WEST" id="EAST_AND_WEST"></a>EAST AND WEST</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In the bare midst of Anglesey they show<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Two springs which close by one another play;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_182" id="Page_182">[182]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, "Thirteen hundred years agone," they say,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Two saints met often where those waters flow.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"One came from Penmon westward, and a glow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whiten'd his face from the sun's fronting ray;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Eastward the other, from the dying day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he with unsunn'd face did always go."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>Seiriol the Bright, Kybi the Dark!</i> men said.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The se&euml;r from the East was then in light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The se&euml;r from the West was then in shade.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah! now 'tis changed. In conquering sunshine bright<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The man of the bold West now comes array'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He of the mystic East is touch'd with night.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_BETTER_PART" id="THE_BETTER_PART"></a>THE BETTER PART</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Long fed on boundless hopes, O race of man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How angrily thou spurn'st all simpler fare!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Christ," some one says, "was human as we are;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No judge eyes us from Heaven, our sin to scan;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"We live no more, when we have done our span."&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Well, then, for Christ," thou answerest, "who can care?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From sin, which Heaven records not, why forbear?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Live we like brutes our life without a plan!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So answerest thou; but why not rather say:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Hath man no second life?&mdash;<i>Pitch this one high!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sits there no judge in Heaven, our sin to see?&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"<i>More strictly, then, the inward judge obey!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was Christ a man like us? <i>Ah! let us try</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>If we then, too, can be such men as he!</i>"</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_183" id="Page_183">[183]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="THE_DIVINITY" id="THE_DIVINITY"></a>THE DIVINITY</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Yes, write it in the rock," Saint Bernard said,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Grave it on brass with adamantine pen!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis God himself becomes apparent, when<br /></span>
<span class="i0">God's wisdom and God's goodness are display'd,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"For God of these his attributes is made."&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Well spake the impetuous Saint, and bore of men<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The suffrage captive; now, not one in ten<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Recalls the obscure opposer he outweigh'd.<a name="FNanchor_10_12" id="FNanchor_10_12"></a><a href="#Footnote_10_12" class="fnanchor">[10]</a><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>God's wisdom and God's goodness!</i>&mdash;Ay, but fools<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mis-define these till God knows them no more.<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Wisdom and goodness, they are God!</i>&mdash;what schools<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Have yet so much as heard this simpler lore?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This no Saint preaches, and this no Church rules;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis in the desert, now and heretofore.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="IMMORTALITY" id="IMMORTALITY"></a>IMMORTALITY</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Foil'd by our fellow-men, depress'd, outworn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We leave the brutal world to take its way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, <i>Patience! in another life</i>, we say,<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The world shall be thrust down, and we up-borne.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And will not, then, the immortal armies scorn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The world's poor, routed leavings? or will they,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who fail'd under the heat of this life's day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Support the fervours of the heavenly morn?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No, no! the energy of life may be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Kept on after the grave, but not begun;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he who flagg'd not in the earthly strife,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_184" id="Page_184">[184]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">From strength to strength advancing&mdash;only he,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His soul well-knit, and all his battles won,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mounts, and that hardly, to eternal life.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_GOOD_SHEPHERD_WITH_THE_KID" id="THE_GOOD_SHEPHERD_WITH_THE_KID"></a>THE GOOD SHEPHERD WITH THE KID</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>He saves the sheep, the goats he doth not save.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">So rang Tertullian's sentence, on the side<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of that unpitying Phrygian sect which cried:<a name="FNanchor_11_13" id="FNanchor_11_13"></a><a href="#Footnote_11_13" class="fnanchor">[11]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Him can no fount of fresh forgiveness lave,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Who sins, once wash'd by the baptismal wave."&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So spake the fierce Tertullian. But she sigh'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The infant Church! of love she felt the tide<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stream on her from her Lord's yet recent grave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And then she smiled; and in the Catacombs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With eye suffused but heart inspired true,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On those walls subterranean, where she hid<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Her head 'mid ignominy, death, and tombs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She her Good Shepherd's hasty image drew&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on his shoulders, not a lamb, a kid.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="MONICAS_LAST_PRAYER12" id="MONICAS_LAST_PRAYER12"></a>MONICA'S LAST PRAYER<a name="FNanchor_12_14" id="FNanchor_12_14"></a><a href="#Footnote_12_14" class="fnanchor">[12]</a></h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Ah, could thy grave at home, at Carthage, be!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Care not for that, and lay me where I fall!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Everywhere heard will be the judgment-call;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>But at God's altar, oh! remember me.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thus Monica, and died in Italy.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet fervent had her longing been, through all<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_185" id="Page_185">[185]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her course, for home at last, and burial<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With her own husband, by the Libyan sea.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Had been! but at the end, to her pure soul<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All tie with all beside seem'd vain and cheap,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And union before God the only care.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Creeds pass, rites change, no altar standeth whole.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet we her memory, as she pray'd, will keep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Keep by this: <i>Life in God, and union there!</i></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_186" id="Page_186">[186]</a><br /></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="LYRIC_POEMS" id="LYRIC_POEMS"></a>LYRIC POEMS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_187" id="Page_187">[187]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<p><br /></p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_188" id="Page_188">[188]</a></span></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_189" id="Page_189">[189]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="SWITZERLAND" id="SWITZERLAND"></a>SWITZERLAND</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>1. MEETING</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Again I see my bliss at hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The town, the lake are here;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My Marguerite smiles upon the strand,<a name="FNanchor_13_15" id="FNanchor_13_15"></a><a href="#Footnote_13_15" class="fnanchor">[13]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unalter'd with the year.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I know that graceful figure fair,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That cheek of languid hue;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I know that soft, enkerchief'd hair,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And those sweet eyes of blue.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Again I spring to make my choice;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Again in tones of ire<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I hear a God's tremendous voice:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Be counsell'd, and retire."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ye guiding Powers who join and part,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What would ye have with me?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, warn some more ambitious heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And let the peaceful be!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>2. PARTING</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Ye storm-winds of Autumn!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Who rush by, who shake<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_190" id="Page_190">[190]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i4">The window, and ruffle<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The gleam-lighted lake;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Who cross to the hill-side<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Thin-sprinkled with farms,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Where the high woods strip sadly<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Their yellowing arms&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ye are bound for the mountains!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ah! with you let me go<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Where your cold, distant barrier,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The vast range of snow,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Through the loose clouds lifts dimly<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Its white peaks in air&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">How deep is their stillness!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ah, would I were there!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But on the stairs what voice is this I hear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Buoyant as morning, and as morning clear?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Say, has some wet bird-haunted English lawn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lent it the music of its trees at dawn?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or was it from some sun-fleck'd mountain-brook<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That the sweet voice its upland clearness took?<br /></span>
<span class="i7">Ah! it comes nearer&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i7">Sweet notes, this way!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Hark! fast by the window<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The rushing winds go,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">To the ice-cumber'd gorges,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The vast seas of snow!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">There the torrents drive upward<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Their rock-strangled hum;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">There the avalanche thunders<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The hoarse torrent dumb.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">&mdash;I come, O ye mountains!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ye torrents, I come!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_191" id="Page_191">[191]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But who is this, by the half-open'd door,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose figure casts a shadow on the floor?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sweet blue eyes&mdash;the soft, ash-colour'd hair&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The cheeks that still their gentle paleness wear&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The lovely lips, with their arch smile that tells<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The unconquer'd joy in which her spirit dwells&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i7">Ah! they bend nearer&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i7">Sweet lips, this way!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Hark! the wind rushes past us!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ah! with that let me go<br /></span>
<span class="i4">To the clear, waning hill-side,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Unspotted by snow,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">There to watch, o'er the sunk vale,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The frore mountain-wall,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Where the niched snow-bed sprays down<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Its powdery fall.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">There its dusky blue clusters<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The aconite spreads;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">There the pines slope, the cloud-strips<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Hung soft in their heads.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">No life but, at moments,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The mountain-bee's hum.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">&mdash;I come, O ye mountains!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ye pine-woods, I come!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Forgive me! forgive me!<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Ah, Marguerite, fain<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Would these arms reach to clasp thee!<br /></span>
<span class="i6">But see! 'tis in vain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">In the void air, towards thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">My stretch'd arms are cast;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">But a sea rolls between us&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Our different past!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_192" id="Page_192">[192]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">To the lips, ah! of others<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Those lips have been prest,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And others, ere I was,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Were strain'd to that breast;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Far, far from each other<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Our spirits have grown;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And what heart knows another?<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Ah! who knows his own?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Blow, ye winds! lift me with you!<br /></span>
<span class="i6">I come to the wild.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Fold closely, O Nature!<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Thine arms round thy child.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">To thee only God granted<br /></span>
<span class="i6">A heart ever new&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">To all always open,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">To all always true.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Ah! calm me, restore me;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">And dry up my tears<br /></span>
<span class="i4">On thy high mountain-platforms,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Where morn first appears;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Where the white mists, for ever,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Are spread and upfurl'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In the stir of the forces<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Whence issued the world.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>3. A FAREWELL</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">My horse's feet beside the lake,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where sweet the unbroken moonbeams lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sent echoes through the night to wake<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Each glistening strand, each heath-fringed bay.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_193" id="Page_193">[193]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The poplar avenue was pass'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the roof'd bridge that spans the stream;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Up the steep street I hurried fast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Led by thy taper's starlike beam.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I came! I saw thee rise!&mdash;the blood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pour'd flushing to thy languid cheek.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lock'd in each other's arms we stood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In tears, with hearts too full to speak.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Days flew;&mdash;ah, soon I could discern<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A trouble in thine alter'd air!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy hand lay languidly in mine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy cheek was grave, thy speech grew rare.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I blame thee not!&mdash;this heart, I know,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To be long loved was never framed;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For something in its depths doth glow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Too strange, too restless, too untamed.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And women&mdash;things that live and move<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mined by the fever of the soul&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They seek to find in those they love<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stern strength, and promise of control.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">They ask not kindness, gentle ways&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These they themselves have tried and known;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They ask a soul which never sways<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With the blind gusts that shake their own.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I too have felt the load I bore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In a too strong emotion's sway;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I too have wish'd, no woman more,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This starting, feverish heart away.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I too have long'd for trenchant force,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And will like a dividing spear;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_194" id="Page_194">[194]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have praised the keen, unscrupulous course,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which knows no doubt, which feels no fear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But in the world I learnt, what there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou too wilt surely one day prove,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That will, that energy, though rare,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are yet far, far less rare than love.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Go, then!&mdash;till time and fate impress<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This truth on thee, be mine no more!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They will!&mdash;for thou, I feel, not less<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than I, wast destined to this lore.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We school our manners, act our parts&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But He, who sees us through and through,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Knows that the bent of both our hearts<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was to be gentle, tranquil, true.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And though we wear out life, alas!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Distracted as a homeless wind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In beating where we must not pass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In seeking what we shall not find;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet we shall one day gain, life past,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clear prospect o'er our being's whole;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall see ourselves, and learn at last<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our true affinities of soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We shall not then deny a course<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To every thought the mass ignore;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We shall not then call hardness force,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor lightness wisdom any more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then, in the eternal Father's smile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our soothed, encouraged souls will dare<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To seem as free from pride and guile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As good, as generous, as they are.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_195" id="Page_195">[195]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then we shall know our friends!&mdash;though much<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will have been lost&mdash;the help in strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The thousand sweet, still joys of such<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As hand in hand face earthly life&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Though these be lost, there will be yet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A sympathy august and pure;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ennobled by a vast regret,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And by contrition seal'd thrice sure.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And we, whose ways were unlike here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May then more neighbouring courses ply;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May to each other be brought near,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And greet across infinity.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">How sweet, unreach'd by earthly jars,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My sister! to maintain with thee<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hush among the shining stars,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The calm upon the moonlit sea!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">How sweet to feel, on the boon air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All our unquiet pulses cease!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To feel that nothing can impair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The gentleness, the thirst for peace&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The gentleness too rudely hurl'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On this wild earth of hate and fear;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The thirst for peace a raving world<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would never let us satiate here.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><b>4. ISOLATION. TO MARGUERITE</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We were apart; yet, day by day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I bade my heart more constant be.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I bade it keep the world away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And grow a home for only thee;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_196" id="Page_196">[196]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor fear'd but thy love likewise grew,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like mine, each day, more tried, more true.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The fault was grave! I might have known,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What far too soon, alas! I learn'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The heart can bind itself alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And faith may oft be unreturn'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Self-sway'd our feelings ebb and swell&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou lov'st no more;&mdash;Farewell! Farewell!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Farewell!&mdash;and thou, thou lonely heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which never yet without remorse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even for a moment didst depart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From thy remote and spher&eacute;d course<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To haunt the place where passions reign&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Back to thy solitude again!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Back! with the conscious thrill of shame<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which Luna felt, that summer-night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flash through her pure immortal frame,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When she forsook the starry height<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To hang over Endymion's sleep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the pine-grown Latmian steep.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet she, chaste queen, had never proved<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How vain a thing is mortal love,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wandering in Heaven, far removed.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou hast long had place to prove<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This truth&mdash;to prove, and make thine own:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Thou hast been, shalt be, art, alone."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Or, if not quite alone, yet they<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which touch thee are unmating things&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ocean and clouds and night and day;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lorn autumns and triumphant springs;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And life, and others' joy and pain,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_197" id="Page_197">[197]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And love, if love, of happier men.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Of happier men&mdash;for they, at least,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have <i>dream'd</i> two human hearts might blend<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In one, and were through faith released<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From isolation without end<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prolong'd; nor knew, although not less<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alone than thou, their loneliness.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><b>5. TO MARGUERITE&mdash;CONTINUED</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes! in the sea of life enisled,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With echoing straits between us thrown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dotting the shoreless watery wild,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We mortal millions live <i>alone</i>.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The islands feel the enclasping flow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then their endless bounds they know.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But when the moon their hollows lights,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they are swept by balms of spring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in their glens, on starry nights,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The nightingales divinely sing;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lovely notes, from shore to shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Across the sounds and channels pour&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Oh! then a longing like despair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is to their farthest caverns sent;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For surely once, they feel, we were<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Parts of a single continent!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now round us spreads the watery plain&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oh might our marges meet again!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Who order'd, that their longing's fire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Should be, as soon as kindled, cool'd?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_198" id="Page_198">[198]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who renders vain their deep desire?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">God, a God their severance ruled!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bade betwixt their shores to be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The unplumb'd, salt, estranging sea.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4"><b>6. ABSENCE</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In this fair stranger's eyes of grey<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thine eyes, my love! I see.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I shiver; for the passing day<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Had borne me far from thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">This is the curse of life! that not<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A nobler, calmer train<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of wiser thoughts and feelings blot<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our passions from our brain;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But each day brings its petty dust<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our soon-choked souls to fill,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And we forget because we must<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And not because we will.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I struggle towards the light; and ye,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Once-long'd-for storms of love!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If with the light ye cannot be,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I bear that ye remove.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I struggle towards the light&mdash;but oh,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While yet the night is chill,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Upon time's barren, stormy flow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stay with me, Marguerite, still!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_199" id="Page_199">[199]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4"><b>7. THE TERRACE AT BERNE</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><b>(COMPOSED TEN YEARS AFTER THE PRECEDING)</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ten years!&mdash;and to my waking eye<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Once more the roofs of Berne appear;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The rocky banks, the terrace high,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The stream!&mdash;and do I linger here?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The clouds are on the Oberland,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Jungfrau snows look faint and far;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But bright are those green fields at hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And through those fields comes down the Aar,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And from the blue twin-lakes it comes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Flows by the town, the churchyard fair;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And 'neath the garden-walk it hums,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The house!&mdash;and is my Marguerite there?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah, shall I see thee, while a flush<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of startled pleasure floods thy brow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick through the oleanders brush,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And clap thy hands, and cry: <i>'Tis thou!</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Or hast thou long since wander'd back,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Daughter of France! to France, thy home;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And flitted down the flowery track<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where feet like thine too lightly come?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Doth riotous laughter now replace<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy smile; and rouge, with stony glare,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy cheek's soft hue; and fluttering lace<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The kerchief that enwound thy hair?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_200" id="Page_200">[200]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Or is it over? art thou dead?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dead!&mdash;and no warning shiver ran<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Across my heart, to say thy thread<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of life was cut, and closed thy span!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Could from earth's ways that figure slight<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Be lost, and I not feel 'twas so?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of that fresh voice the gay delight<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fail from earth's air, and I not know?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Or shall I find thee still, but changed,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But not the Marguerite of thy prime?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With all thy being re-arranged,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pass'd through the crucible of time;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">With spirit vanish'd, beauty waned,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And hardly yet a glance, a tone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A gesture&mdash;anything&mdash;retain'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of all that was my Marguerite's own?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I will not know! For wherefore try,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To things by mortal course that live,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A shadowy durability,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For which they were not meant, to give?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Like driftwood spars, which meet and pass<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Upon the boundless ocean-plain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So on the sea of life, alas!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man meets man&mdash;meets, and quits again.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I knew it when my life was young;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I feel it still, now youth is o'er.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;The mists are on the mountain hung,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And Marguerite I shall see no more.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_201" id="Page_201">[201]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="THE_STRAYED_REVELLER" id="THE_STRAYED_REVELLER"></a>THE STRAYED REVELLER</h2>


<h3>THE PORTICO OF CIRCE'S PALACE. EVENING</h3>

<p class="center"><i>A Youth. Circe</i></p>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Youth</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Faster, faster,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O Circe, Goddess,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let the wild, thronging train,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The bright procession<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of eddying forms,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sweep through my soul!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Thou standest, smiling<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down on me! thy right arm,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lean'd up against the column there,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Props thy soft cheek;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy left holds, hanging loosely,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The deep cup, ivy-cinctured,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I held but now.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Is it, then, evening<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So soon? I see, the night-dews,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cluster'd in thick beads, dim<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The agate brooch-stones<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On thy white shoulder;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The cool night-wind, too,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Blows through the portico,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stirs thy hair, Goddess,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Waves thy white robe!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Circe</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Whence art thou, sleeper?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_202" id="Page_202">[202]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Youth</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">When the white dawn first<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through the rough fir-planks<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of my hut, by the chestnuts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Up at the valley-head,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Came breaking, Goddess!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I sprang up, I threw round me<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My dappled fawn-skin;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Passing out, from the wet turf,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where they lay, by the hut door,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I snatch'd up my vine-crown, my fir-staff,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All drench'd in dew&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Came swift down to join<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The rout early gather'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the town, round the temple,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Iacchus' white fane<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On yonder hill.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Quick I pass'd, following<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The wood-cutters' cart-track<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down the dark valley;&mdash;I saw<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On my left, through the beeches,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy palace, Goddess,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Smokeless, empty!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Trembling, I enter'd; beheld<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The court all silent,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The lions sleeping,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the altar this bowl.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I drank, Goddess!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And sank down here, sleeping,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the steps of thy portico.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_203" id="Page_203">[203]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Circe</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Foolish boy! Why tremblest thou?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou lovest it, then, my wine?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wouldst more of it? See, how glows,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through the delicate, flush'd marble,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The red, creaming liquor,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Strown with dark seeds!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Drink, then! I chide thee not,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deny thee not my bowl.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Come, stretch forth thy hand, then&mdash;so!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Drink&mdash;drink again!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Youth</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Thanks, gracious one!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, the sweet fumes again!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">More soft, ah me,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">More subtle-winding<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That Pan's flute-music!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Faint&mdash;faint! Ah me,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Again the sweet sleep!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Circe</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Hist! Thou&mdash;within there!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Come forth, Ulysses!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Art tired with hunting?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While we range the woodland,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See what the day brings.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Ulysses</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ever new magic!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hast thou then lured hither,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wonderful Goddess, by thy art,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The young, languid-eyed Ampelus,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_204" id="Page_204">[204]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Iacchus' darling&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or some youth beloved of Pan,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Pan and the Nymphs?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That he sits, bending downward<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His white, delicate neck<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the ivy-wreathed marge<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of thy cup; the bright, glancing vine-leaves<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That crown his hair,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Falling forward, mingling<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With the dark ivy-plants&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His fawn-skin, half untied,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Smear'd with red wine-stains? Who is he,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That he sits, overweigh'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By fumes of wine and sleep,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So late, in thy portico?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What youth, Goddess,&mdash;what guest<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Gods or mortals?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Circe</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Hist! he wakes!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I lured him not hither, Ulysses.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nay, ask him!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Youth</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Who speaks? Ah, who comes forth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To thy side, Goddess, from within?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How shall I name him?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This spare, dark-featured,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick-eyed stranger?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, and I see too<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His sailor's bonnet,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His short coat, travel-tarnish'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With one arm bare!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_205" id="Page_205">[205]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Art thou not he, whom fame<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This long time rumours<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The favour'd guest of Circe, brought by the waves?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Art thou he, stranger?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The wise Ulysses,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Laertes' son?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>Ulysses</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I am Ulysses.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And thou, too, sleeper?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy voice is sweet.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It may be thou hast follow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through the islands some divine bard,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By age taught many things,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Age and the Muses;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And heard him delighting<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The chiefs and people<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the banquet, and learn'd his songs,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Gods and Heroes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of war and arts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And peopled cities,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Inland, or built<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By the grey sea.&mdash;If so, then hail!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I honour and welcome thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Youth</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The Gods are happy.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They turn on all sides<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their shining eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And see below them<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The earth and men.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They see Tiresias<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sitting, staff in hand,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_206" id="Page_206">[206]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the warm, grassy<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Asopus bank,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His robe drawn over<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His old, sightless head,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Revolving inly<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The doom of Thebes.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They see the Centaurs<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the upper glens<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Pelion, in the streams,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where red-berried ashes fringe<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The clear-brown shallow pools,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With streaming flanks, and heads<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rear'd proudly, snuffing<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mountain wind.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They see the Indian<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Drifting, knife in hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His frail boat moor'd to<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A floating isle thick-matted<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With large-leaved, low-creeping melon-plants,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the dark cucumber.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He reaps, and stows them,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Drifting&mdash;drifting;&mdash;round him,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Round his green harvest-plot,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Flow the cool lake-waves,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mountains ring them.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They see the Scythian<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the wide stepp, unharnessing<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His wheel'd house at noon.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He tethers his beast down, and makes his meal&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mares' milk, and bread<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Baked on the embers;&mdash;all around<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The boundless, waving grass-plains stretch, thick-starr'd<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_207" id="Page_207">[207]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">With saffron and the yellow hollyhock<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And flag-leaved iris-flowers.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sitting in his cart<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He makes his meal; before him, for long miles,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Alive with bright green lizards,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the springing bustard-fowl,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The track, a straight black line,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Furrows the rich soil; here and there<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Clusters of lonely mounds<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Topp'd with rough-hewn,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Grey, rain-blear'd statues, overpeer<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The sunny waste.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They see the ferry<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the broad, clay-laden<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lone Chorasmian stream;&mdash;thereon,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With snort and strain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Two horses, strongly swimming, tow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The ferry-boat, with woven ropes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To either bow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Firm harness'd by the mane; a chief,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With shout and shaken spear,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stands at the prow, and guides them; but astern<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The cowering merchants, in long robes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sit pale beside their wealth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of silk-bales and of balsam-drops,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of gold and ivory,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of turquoise-earth and amethyst,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Jasper and chalcedony,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And milk-barr'd onyx-stones.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The loaded boat swings groaning<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the yellow eddies;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Gods behold them.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_208" id="Page_208">[208]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">They see the Heroes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sitting in the dark ship<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the foamless, long-heaving<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Violet sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At sunset nearing<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Happy Islands.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">These things, Ulysses,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The wise bards also<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Behold and sing.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But oh, what labour!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O prince, what pain!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They too can see<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tiresias;&mdash;but the Gods,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who give them vision,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Added this law:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That they should bear too<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His groping blindness,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His dark foreboding,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His scorn'd white hairs;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bear Hera's anger<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through a life lengthen'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To seven ages.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They see the Centaurs<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On Pelion;&mdash;then they feel,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They too, the maddening wine<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Swell their large veins to bursting; in wild pain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They feel the biting spears<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the grim Lapith&aelig;, and Theseus, drive,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Drive crashing through their bones; they feel<br /></span>
<span class="i2">High on a jutting rock in the red stream<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Alcmena's dreadful son<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ply his bow;&mdash;such a price<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_209" id="Page_209">[209]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Gods exact for song:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To become what we sing.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They see the Indian<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On his mountain lake; but squalls<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Make their skiff reel, and worms<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the unkind spring have gnawn<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their melon-harvest to the heart.&mdash;They see<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Scythian; but long frosts<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Parch them in winter-time on the bare stepp,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Till they too fade like grass; they crawl<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like shadows forth in spring.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They see the merchants<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the Oxus stream;&mdash;but care<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Must visit first them too, and make them pale.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whether, through whirling sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A cloud of desert robber-horse have burst<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Upon their caravan; or greedy kings,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the wall'd cities the way passes through,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crush'd them with tolls; or fever-airs,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On some great river's marge,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mown them down, far from home.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They see the Heroes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Near harbour;&mdash;but they share<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their lives, and former violent toil in Thebes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seven-gated Thebes, or Troy;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or where the echoing oars<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Argo first<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Startled the unknown sea.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The old Silenus<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Came, lolling in the sunshine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the dewy forest-coverts,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_210" id="Page_210">[210]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">This way, at noon.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sitting by me, while his Fauns<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down at the water-side<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sprinkled and smoothed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His drooping garland,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He told me these things.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But I, Ulysses,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sitting on the warm steps,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Looking over the valley,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All day long, have seen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Without pain, without labour,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sometimes a wild-hair'd M&aelig;nad&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sometimes a Faun with torches&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And sometimes, for a moment,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Passing through the dark stems<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Flowing-robed, the beloved,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The desired, the divine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beloved Iacchus.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah, cool night-wind, tremulous stars!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, glimmering water,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fitful earth-murmur,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dreaming woods!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, golden-hair'd, strangely smiling Goddess,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And thou, proved, much enduring,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wave-toss'd Wanderer!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who can stand still?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ye fade, ye swim, ye waver before me&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The cup again!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Faster, faster,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O Circe, Goddess,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let the wild, thronging train,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_211" id="Page_211">[211]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">The bright procession<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of eddying forms,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sweep through my soul!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="FRAGMENT_OF_AN_ANTIGONE" id="FRAGMENT_OF_AN_ANTIGONE"></a>FRAGMENT OF AN "ANTIGONE"</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Well hath he done who hath seized happiness!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For little do the all-containing hours,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though opulent, freely give.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who, weighing that life well<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fortune presents unpray'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Declines her ministry, and carves his own;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, justice not infringed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Makes his own welfare his unswerved-from law.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He does well too, who keeps that clue the mild<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Birth-Goddess and the austere Fates first gave.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For from the day when these<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bring him, a weeping child,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First to the light, and mark<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A country for him, kinsfolk, and a home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unguided he remains,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till the Fates come again, this time with death.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In little companies,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, our own place once left,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ignorant where to stand, or whom to avoid,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By city and household group'd, we live; and many shocks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our order heaven-ordain'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Must every day endure:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Voyages, exiles, hates, dissensions, wars.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_212" id="Page_212">[212]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Besides what waste <i>he</i> makes,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The all-hated, order-breaking,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Without friend, city, or home,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Death, who dissevers all.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Him then I praise, who dares<br /></span>
<span class="i4">To self-selected good<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prefer obedience to the primal law,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which consecrates the ties of blood; for these, indeed,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Are to the Gods a care;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">That touches but himself.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For every day man may be link'd and loosed<br /></span>
<span class="i4">With strangers; but the bond<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Original, deep-inwound,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Of blood, can he not bind,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Nor, if Fate binds, not bear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">But hush! H&aelig;mon, whom Antigone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Robbing herself of life in burying,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against Creon's law, Polynices,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Robs of a loved bride&mdash;pale, imploring,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Waiting her passage,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forth from the palace hitherward comes.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>H&aelig;mon</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No, no, old men, Creon, I curse not!<br /></span>
<span class="i7">I weep, Thebans,<br /></span>
<span class="i3">One than Creon crueller far!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For he, he, at least, by slaying her,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">August laws doth mightily vindicate;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But them, too-bold, headstrong, pitiless!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah me!&mdash;honourest more than thy lover,<br /></span>
<span class="i7">O Antigone!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A dead, ignorant, thankless corpse.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_213" id="Page_213">[213]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Nor was the love untrue<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which the Dawn-Goddess bore<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To that fair youth she erst,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Leaving the salt sea-beds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And coming flush'd over the stormy frith<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of loud Euripus, saw&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Saw and snatch'd, wild with love,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the pine-dotted spurs<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Parnes, where thy waves,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Asopus! gleam rock-hemm'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Hunter of the Tanagr&aelig;an Field.<a name="FNanchor_14_16" id="FNanchor_14_16"></a><a href="#Footnote_14_16" class="fnanchor">[14]</a><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But him, in his sweet prime,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By severance immature,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By Artemis' soft shafts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She, though a Goddess born,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Saw in the rocky isle of Delos die.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Such end o'ertook that love.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For she desired to make<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Immortal mortal man,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And blend his happy life,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Far from the Gods, with hers;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To him postponing an eternal law.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>H&aelig;mon</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But like me, she, wroth, complaining,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Succumb'd to the envy of unkind Gods;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, her beautiful arms unclasping,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her fair youth unwillingly gave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Nor, though enthroned too high<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To fear assault of envious Gods,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_214" id="Page_214">[214]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">His beloved Argive seer would Zeus retain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From his appointed end<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In this our Thebes; but when<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His flying steeds came near<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To cross the steep Ismenian glen,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The broad earth open'd, and whelm'd them and him;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And through the void air sang<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At large his enemy's spear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And fain would Zeus have saved his tired son<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beholding him where the Two Pillars stand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er the sun-redden'd western straits,<a name="FNanchor_15_17" id="FNanchor_15_17"></a><a href="#Footnote_15_17" class="fnanchor">[15]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or at his work in that dim lower world.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fain would he have recall'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fraudulent oath which bound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To a much feebler wight the heroic man.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But he preferr'd Fate to his strong desire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor did there need less than the burning pile<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the towering Trachis crags,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the Spercheios vale, shaken with groans,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the roused Maliac gulph,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And scared &OElig;t&aelig;an snows,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To achieve his son's deliverance, O my child!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="FRAGMENT_OF_CHORUS_OF_A_DEJANEIRA" id="FRAGMENT_OF_CHORUS_OF_A_DEJANEIRA"></a>FRAGMENT OF CHORUS OF A "DEJANEIRA"</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O frivolous mind of man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Light ignorance, and hurrying, unsure thoughts!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though man bewails you not,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How <i>I</i> bewail you!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Little in your prosperity<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do you seek counsel of the Gods.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_215" id="Page_215">[215]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Proud, ignorant, self-adored, you live alone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In profound silence stern,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Among their savage gorges and cold springs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unvisited remain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The great oracular shrines.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thither in your adversity<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do you betake yourselves for light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But strangely misinterpret all you hear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For you will not put on<br /></span>
<span class="i0">New hearts with the enquirer's holy robe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And purged, considerate minds.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And him on whom, at the end<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of toil and dolour untold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Gods have said that repose<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At last shall descend undisturb'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Him you expect to behold<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In an easy old age, in a happy home;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No end but this you praise.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But him, on whom, in the prime<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of life, with vigour undimm'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With unspent mind, and a soul<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unworn, undebased, undecay'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mournfully grating, the gates<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the city of death have for ever closed&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Him</i>, I count <i>him</i>, well-starr'd.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="EARLY_DEATH_AND_FAME" id="EARLY_DEATH_AND_FAME"></a>EARLY DEATH AND FAME</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For him who must see many years,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I praise the life which slips away<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Out of the light and mutely; which avoids<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_216" id="Page_216">[216]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fame, and her less fair followers, envy, strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stupid detraction, jealousy, cabal,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Insincere praises; which descends<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The quiet mossy track to age.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But, when immature death<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beckons too early the guest<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the half-tried banquet of life,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Young, in the bloom of his days;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Leaves no leisure to press,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Slow and surely, the sweets<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of a tranquil life in the shade&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fuller for him be the hours!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Give him emotion, though pain!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let him live, let him feel: <i>I have lived.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heap up his moments with life!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Triple his pulses with fame!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="PHILOMELA" id="PHILOMELA"></a>PHILOMELA</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hark! ah, the nightingale&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The tawny-throated!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hark, from that moonlit cedar what a burst!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What triumph! hark!&mdash;what pain!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O wanderer from a Grecian shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still, after many years, in distant lands,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still nourishing in thy bewilder'd brain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That wild, unquench'd, deep-sunken, old-world pain&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Say, will it never heal?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And can this fragrant lawn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With its cool trees, and night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the sweet, tranquil Thames,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_217" id="Page_217">[217]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And moonshine, and the dew,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To thy rack'd heart and brain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Afford no balm?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Dost thou to-night behold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here, through the moonlight on this English grass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The unfriendly palace in the Thracian wild?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dost thou again peruse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With hot cheeks and sear'd eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The too clear web, and thy dumb sister's shame?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dost thou once more assay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy flight, and feel come over thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Poor fugitive, the feathery change<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once more, and once more seem to make resound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With love and hate, triumph and agony,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lone Daulis, and the high Cephissian vale?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Listen, Eugenia&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How thick the bursts come crowding through the leaves!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Again&mdash;thou hearest?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Eternal passion!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Eternal pain!<br /></span>
</div></div>


<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="URANIA" id="URANIA"></a>URANIA</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I too have suffer'd; yet I know<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She is not cold, though she seems so.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She is not cold, she is not light;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But our ignoble souls lack might.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">She smiles and smiles, and will not sigh,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While we for hopeless passion die;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet she could love, those eyes declare,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Were but men nobler than they are.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_218" id="Page_218">[218]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Eagerly once her gracious ken<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Was turn'd upon the sons of men;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But light the serious visage grew&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She look'd, and smiled, and saw them through.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Our petty souls, our strutting wits,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our labour'd, puny passion-fits&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, may she scorn them still, till we<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Scorn them as bitterly as she!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yet show her once, ye heavenly Powers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">One of some worthier race than ours!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">One for whose sake she once might prove<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How deeply she who scorns can love.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">His eyes be like the starry lights&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His voice like sounds of summer nights&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In all his lovely mien let pierce<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The magic of the universe!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And she to him will reach her hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And gazing in his eyes will stand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And know her friend, and weep for glee,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And cry: <i>Long, long I've look'd for thee.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Then will she weep; with smiles, till then,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Coldly she mocks the sons of men.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Till then, her lovely eyes maintain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their pure, unwavering, deep disdain.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="EUPHROSYNE" id="EUPHROSYNE"></a>EUPHROSYNE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I must not say that thou wast true,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet let me say that thou wast fair;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And they, that lovely face who view,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Why should they ask if truth be there?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_219" id="Page_219">[219]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Truth&mdash;what is truth? Two bleeding hearts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wounded by men, by fortune tried,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Outwearied with their lonely parts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Vow to beat henceforth side by side.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The world to them was stern and drear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their lot was but to weep and moan.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, let them keep their faith sincere,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For neither could subsist alone!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But souls whom some benignant breath<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath charm'd at birth from gloom and care,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These ask no love, these plight no faith,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For they are happy as they are.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The world to them may homage make,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And garlands for their forehead weave;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And what the world can give, they take&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But they bring more than they receive.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They shine upon the world! Their ears<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To one demand alone are coy;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They will not give us love and tears,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They bring us light and warmth and joy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">It was not love which heaved thy breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fair child!&mdash;it was the bliss within.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Adieu! and say that one, at least,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Was just to what he did not win.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="CALAIS_SANDS" id="CALAIS_SANDS"></a>CALAIS SANDS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">A thousand knights have rein'd their steeds<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To watch this line of sand-hills run,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Along the never-silent Strait,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To Calais glittering in the sun;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_220" id="Page_220">[220]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">To look tow'rd Ardres' Golden Field<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Across this wide a&euml;rial plain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which glows as if the Middle Age<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Were gorgeous upon earth again.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Oh, that to share this famous scene,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I saw, upon the open sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy lovely presence at my side,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy shawl, thy look, thy smile, thy hand!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">How exquisite thy voice would come,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My darling, on this lonely air!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How sweetly would the fresh sea-breeze<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shake loose some band of soft brown hair!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yet now my glance but once hath roved<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O'er Calais and its famous plain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To England's cliffs my gaze is turn'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the blue strait mine eyes I strain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Thou comest! Yes! the vessel's cloud<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hangs dark upon the rolling sea.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Oh, that yon sea-bird's wings were mine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To win one instant's glimpse of thee!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I must not spring to grasp thy hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To woo thy smile, to seek thine eye;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But I may stand far off, and gaze,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And watch thee pass unconscious by,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And spell thy looks, and guess thy thoughts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mixt with the idlers on the pier.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, might I always rest unseen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So I might have thee always near!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_221" id="Page_221">[221]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">To-morrow hurry through the fields<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Flanders to the storied Rhine!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To-night those soft-fringed eyes shall close<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beneath one roof, my queen! with mine.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="FADED_LEAVES" id="FADED_LEAVES"></a>FADED LEAVES</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>1. THE RIVER</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Still glides the stream, slow drops the boat<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the rustling poplars' shade;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Silent the swans beside us float&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">None speaks, none heeds; ah, turn thy head!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Let those arch eyes now softly shine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That mocking mouth grow sweetly bland;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah, let them rest, those eyes, on mine!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On mine let rest that lovely hand!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">My pent-up tears oppress my brain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My heart is swoln with love unsaid.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah, let me weep, and tell my pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on thy shoulder rest my head!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Before I die&mdash;before the soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which now is mine, must re-attain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Immunity from my control,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wander round the world again;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Before this teased o'erlabour'd heart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For ever leaves its vain employ,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dead to its deep habitual smart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And dead to hopes of future joy.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_222" id="Page_222">[222]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>2. TOO LATE</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Each on his own strict line we move,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And some find death ere they find love;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So far apart their lives are thrown<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the twin soul which halves their own.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And sometimes, by still harder fate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The lovers meet, but meet too late.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Thy heart is mine!&mdash;<i>True, true! ah, true!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Then, love, thy hand!&mdash;<i>Ah no! adieu!</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>3. SEPARATION</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Stop!&mdash;not to me, at this bitter departing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Speak of the sure consolations of time!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fresh be the wound, still-renew'd be its smarting,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So but thy image endure in its prime.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But, if the stedfast commandment of Nature<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wills that remembrance should always decay&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If the loved form and the deep-cherish'd feature<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Must, when unseen, from the soul fade away&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Me let no half-effaced memories cumber!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fled, fled at once, be all vestige of thee!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Deep be the darkness and still be the slumber&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dead be the past and its phantoms to me!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then, when we meet, and thy look strays toward me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Scanning my face and the changes wrought there:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Who</i>, let me say, <i>is this stranger regards me,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>With the grey eyes, and the lovely brown hair</i>?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_223" id="Page_223">[223]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>4. ON THE RHINE</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Vain is the effort to forget.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some day I shall be cold, I know,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As is the eternal moonlit snow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the high Alps, to which I go&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But ah! not yet, not yet!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Vain is the agony of grief.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis true, indeed, an iron knot<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ties straitly up from mine thy lot,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And were it snapt&mdash;thou lov'st me not!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But is despair relief?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Awhile let me with thought have done.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as this brimm'd unwrinkled Rhine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that far purple mountain-line,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lie sweetly in the look divine<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the slow-sinking sun;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So let me lie, and, calm as they,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let beam upon my inward view<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Those eyes of deep, soft, lucent hue&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Eyes too expressive to be blue,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Too lovely to be grey.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah, Quiet, all things feel thy balm!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Those blue hills too, this river's flow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were restless once, but long ago.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tamed is their turbulent youthful glow;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their joy is in their calm.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_224" id="Page_224">[224]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>5. LONGING</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Come to me in my dreams, and then<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By day I shall be well again!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For then the night will more than pay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hopeless longing of the day.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Come, as thou cam'st a thousand times,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A messenger from radiant climes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And smile on thy new world, and be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As kind to others as to me!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Or, as thou never cam'st in sooth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come now, and let me dream it truth;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And part my hair, and kiss my brow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And say: <i>My love! why sufferest thou?</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Come to me in my dreams, and then<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By day I shall be well again!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For then the night will more than pay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hopeless longing of the day.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="DESPONDENCY" id="DESPONDENCY"></a>DESPONDENCY</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The thoughts that rain their steady glow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like stars on life's cold sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which others know, or say they know&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They never shone for me.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Thoughts light, like gleams, my spirit's sky,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But they will not remain.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They light me once, they hurry by;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And never come again.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_225" id="Page_225">[225]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="SELF-DECEPTION" id="SELF-DECEPTION"></a>SELF-DECEPTION</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Say, what blinds us, that we claim the glory<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of possessing powers not our share?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Since man woke on earth, he knows his story,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, before we woke on earth, we were.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Long, long since, undower'd yet, our spirit<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Roam'd, ere birth, the treasuries of God;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Saw the gifts, the powers it might inherit,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ask'd an outfit for its earthly road.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Then, as now, this tremulous, eager being<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Strain'd and long'd and grasp'd each gift it saw;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then, as now, a Power beyond our seeing<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Staved us back, and gave our choice the law.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah, whose hand that day through Heaven guided<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man's new spirit, since it was not we?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, who sway'd our choice, and who decided<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What our gifts, and what our wants should be?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For, alas! he left us each retaining<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shreds of gifts which he refused in full.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still these waste us with their hopeless straining,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still the attempt to use them proves them null.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And on earth we wander, groping, reeling;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Powers stir in us, stir and disappear.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah! and he, who placed our master-feeling,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fail'd to place that master-feeling clear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">We but dream we have our wish'd-for powers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ends we seek we never shall attain.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah! <i>some</i> power exists there, which is ours?<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Some</i> end is there, we indeed may gain?</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_226" id="Page_226">[226]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="DOVER_BEACH" id="DOVER_BEACH"></a>DOVER BEACH</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The sea is calm to-night.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The tide is full, the moon lies fair<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Upon the straits;&mdash;on the French coast the light<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gleams and is gone; the cliffs of England stand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Glimmering and vast, out in the tranquil bay.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Come to the window, sweet is the night-air!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only, from the long line of spray<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where the sea meets the moon-blanch'd land,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Listen! you hear the grating roar<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of pebbles which the waves draw back, and fling,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At their return, up the high strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Begin, and cease, and then again begin,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With tremulous cadence slow, and bring<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The eternal note of sadness in.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Sophocles long ago<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heard it on the &AElig;g&aelig;an, and it brought<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Into his mind the turbid ebb and flow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of human misery; we<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Find also in the sound a thought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hearing it by this distant northern sea.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The Sea of Faith<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Was once, too, at the full, and round earth's shore<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furl'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But now I only hear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Retreating, to the breath<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the night-wind, down the vast edges drear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And naked shingles of the world.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_227" id="Page_227">[227]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah, love, let us be true<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To one another! for the world, which seems<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To lie before us like a land of dreams,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So various, so beautiful, so new,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath really neither joy, nor love, nor light,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And we are here as on a darkling plain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where ignorant armies clash by night.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="GROWING_OLD" id="GROWING_OLD"></a>GROWING OLD</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What is it to grow old?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is it to lose the glory of the form,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The lustre of the eye?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is it for beauty to forego her wreath?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Yes, but not this alone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Is it to feel our strength&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not our bloom only, but our strength&mdash;decay?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is it to feel each limb<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Grow stiffer, every function less exact,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Each nerve more loosely strung?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yes, this, and more; but not<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, 'tis not what in youth we dream'd 'twould be!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Tis not to have our life<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mellow'd and soften'd as with sunset-glow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A golden day's decline.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">'Tis not to see the world<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As from a height, with rapt prophetic eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And heart profoundly stirr'd;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_228" id="Page_228">[228]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">And weep, and feel the fulness of the past,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The years that are no more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">It is to spend long days<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And not once feel that we were ever young;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It is to add, immured<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the hot prison of the present, month<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To month with weary pain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">It is to suffer this,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And feel but half, and feebly, what we feel.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deep in our hidden heart<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Festers the dull remembrance of a change,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But no emotion&mdash;none.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">It is&mdash;last stage of all&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When we are frozen up within, and quite<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The phantom of ourselves,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To hear the world applaud the hollow ghost<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which blamed the living man.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_PROGRESS_OF_POESY" id="THE_PROGRESS_OF_POESY"></a>THE PROGRESS OF POESY</h2>

<h3>A VARIATION</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Youth rambles on life's arid mount,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And strikes the rock, and finds the vein,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And brings the water from the fount,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The fount which shall not flow again.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The man mature with labour chops<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For the bright stream a channel grand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And sees not that the sacred drops<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ran off and vanish'd out of hand.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_229" id="Page_229">[229]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And then the old man totters nigh,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And feebly rakes among the stones.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mount is mute, the channel dry;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And down he lays his weary bones.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="NEW_ROME" id="NEW_ROME"></a>NEW ROME</h2>

<h3>LINES WRITTEN FOR MISS STORY'S ALBUM</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">The armless Vatican Cupid<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Hangs down his beautiful head;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">For the priests have got him in prison,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And Psyche long has been dead.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">But see, his shaven oppressors<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Begin to quake and disband!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And <i>The Times</i>, that bright Apollo,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Proclaims salvation at hand.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">"And what," cries Cupid, "will save us?"<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Says Apollo: "<i>Modernise Rome!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i4">What inns! Your streets, too, how narrow!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Too much of palace and dome!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">"O learn of London, whose paupers<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Are not pushed out by the swells!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Wide streets with fine double trottoirs;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And then&mdash;the London hotels!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">The armless Vatican Cupid<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Hangs down his head as before.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Through centuries past it has hung so,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And will through centuries more.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_230" id="Page_230">[230]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="PIS-ALLER" id="PIS-ALLER"></a>PIS-ALLER</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">"Man is blind because of sin,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Revelation makes him sure;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Without that, who looks within,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Looks in vain, for all's obscure."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Nay, look closer into man!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Tell me, can you find indeed<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Nothing sure, no moral plan<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Clear prescribed, without your creed?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">"No, I nothing can perceive!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Without that, all's dark for men.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">That, or nothing, I believe."&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">For God's sake, believe it then!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_LAST_WORD" id="THE_LAST_WORD"></a>THE LAST WORD</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Creep into thy narrow bed,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Creep, and let no more be said!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Vain thy onset! all stands fast.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou thyself must break at last.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Let the long contention cease!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Geese are swans, and swans are geese.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let them have it how they will!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou art tired; best be still.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They out-talk'd thee, hiss'd thee, tore thee?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Better men fared thus before thee;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fired their ringing shot and pass'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hotly charged&mdash;and sank at last.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_231" id="Page_231">[231]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Charge once more, then, and be dumb!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let the victors, when they come,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When the forts of folly fall,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Find thy body by the wall!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_LORDS_MESSENGERS" id="THE_LORDS_MESSENGERS"></a>THE LORD'S MESSENGERS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Thus saith the Lord to his own:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">"See ye the trouble below?<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Warfare of man from his birth!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Too long let we them groan;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Haste, arise ye, and go,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Carry my peace upon earth!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Gladly they rise at his call,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Gladly obey his command,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Gladly descend to the plain.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">&mdash;Ah! How few of them all,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Those willing servants, shall stand<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In the Master's presence again!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Some in the tumult are lost;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Baffled, bewilder'd, they stray.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Some, as prisoners, draw breath.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Some, unconquer'd, are cross'd<br /></span>
<span class="i4">(Not yet half through the day)<br /></span>
<span class="i4">By a pitiless arrow of Death.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Hardly, hardly shall one<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Come, with countenance bright,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">At the close of day, from the plain;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">His Master's errand well done,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Safe through the smoke of the fight,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Back to his Master again.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_232" id="Page_232">[232]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="A_NAMELESS_EPITAPH" id="A_NAMELESS_EPITAPH"></a>A NAMELESS EPITAPH</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ask not my name, O friend!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That Being only, which hath known each man<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the beginning, can<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Remember each unto the end.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="BACCHANALIA" id="BACCHANALIA"></a>BACCHANALIA;<br /><br />

OR,<br /><br />

THE NEW AGE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>I</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The evening comes, the fields are still.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The tinkle of the thirsty rill,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unheard all day, ascends again;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deserted is the half-mown plain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Silent the swaths! the ringing wain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mower's cry, the dog's alarms,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All housed within the sleeping farms!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The business of the day is done,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The last-left haymaker is gone.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And from the thyme upon the height,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And from the elder-blossom white<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And pale dog-roses in the hedge,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And from the mint-plant in the sedge,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In puffs of balm the night-air blows<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The perfume which the day forgoes.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And on the pure horizon far,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See, pulsing with the first-born star,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The liquid sky above the hill!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The evening comes, the fields are still.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_233" id="Page_233">[233]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Loitering and leaping,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With saunter, with bounds&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Flickering and circling<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In files and in rounds&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gaily their pine-staff green<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tossing in air,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Loose o'er their shoulders white<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Showering their hair&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See! the wild M&aelig;nads<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Break from the wood,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Youth and Iacchus<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Maddening their blood.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See! through the quiet land<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rioting they pass&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fling the fresh heaps about,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Trample the grass.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tear from the rifled hedge<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Garlands, their prize;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fill with their sports the field,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fill with their cries.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Shepherd, what ails thee, then?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shepherd, why mute?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Forth with thy joyous song!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Forth with thy flute!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tempts not the revel blithe?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lure not their cries?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Glow not their shoulders smooth?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Melt not their eyes?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is not, on cheeks like those,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lovely the flush?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;<i>Ah, so the quiet was!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>So was the hush!</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_234" id="Page_234">[234]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><b>II</b><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The epoch ends, the world is still,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The age has talk'd and work'd its fill&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The famous orators have shone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The famous poets sung and gone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The famous men of war have fought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The famous speculators thought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The famous players, sculptors, wrought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The famous painters fill'd their wall,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The famous critics judged it all.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The combatants are parted now&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Uphung the spear, unbent the bow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The puissant crown'd, the weak laid low.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And in the after-silence sweet,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Now strifes are hush'd, our ears doth meet,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ascending pure, the bell-like fame<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of this or that down-trodden name<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Delicate spirits, push'd away<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the hot press of the noon-day.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And o'er the plain, where the dead age<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Did its now silent warfare wage&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O'er that wide plain, now wrapt in gloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where many a splendour finds its tomb,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Many spent fames and fallen mights&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The one or two immortal lights<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rise slowly up into the sky<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To shine there everlastingly,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like stars over the bounding hill.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The epoch ends, the world is still.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Thundering and bursting<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In torrents, in waves<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_235" id="Page_235">[235]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Carolling and shouting<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Over tombs, amid graves&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">See! on the cumber'd plain<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Clearing a stage,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Scattering the past about,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Comes the new age.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Bards make new poems,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Thinkers new schools,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Statesmen new systems,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Critics new rules.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">All things begin again;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Life is their prize;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Earth with their deeds they fill,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Fill with their cries.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Poet, what ails thee, then?<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Say, why so mute?<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Forth with thy praising voice!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Forth with thy flute!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Loiterer! why sittest thou<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Sunk in thy dream?<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Tempts not the bright new age?<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Shines not its stream?<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Look, ah, what genius,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Art, science, wit!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Soldiers like C&aelig;sar,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Statesmen like Pitt!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Sculptors like Phidias,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Raphaels in shoals,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Poets like Shakespeare&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Beautiful souls!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">See, on their glowing cheeks<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Heavenly the flush!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_236" id="Page_236">[236]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i4">&mdash;<i>Ah, so the silence was!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i4"><i>So was the hush!</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The world but feels the present's spell,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The poet feels the past as well;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whatever men have done, might do,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whatever thought, might think it too.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="EPILOGUE_to_Lessing" id="EPILOGUE_to_Lessing"></a>EPILOGUE<br /><br />

TO LESSING'S LAOCO&Ouml;N</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">One morn as through Hyde Park we walk'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My friend and I, by chance we talk'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Lessing's famed Laoco&ouml;n;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And after we awhile had gone<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In Lessing's track, and tried to see<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What painting is, what poetry&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Diverging to another thought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Ah," cries my friend, "but who hath taught<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Why music and the other arts<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Oftener perform aright their parts<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Than poetry? why she, than they,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fewer fine successes can display?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"For 'tis so, surely! Even in Greece,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where best the poet framed his piece,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Even in that Ph&oelig;bus-guarded ground<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pausanias on his travels found<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Good poems, if he look'd, more rare<br /></span>
<span class="i2">(Though many) than good statues were&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For these, in truth, were everywhere.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of bards full many a stroke divine<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_237" id="Page_237">[237]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">In Dante's, Petrarch's, Tasso's line,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The land of Ariosto show'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And yet, e'en there, the canvas glow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With triumphs, a yet ampler brood,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Raphael and his brotherhood.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And nobly perfect, in our day<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of haste, half-work, and disarray,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Profound yet touching, sweet yet strong,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath risen Goethe's, Wordsworth's song;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet even I (and none will bow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deeper to these) must needs allow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They yield us not, to soothe our pains,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Such multitude of heavenly strains<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As from the kings of sound are blown,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mozart, Beethoven, Mendelssohn."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">While thus my friend discoursed, we pass<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Out of the path, and take the grass.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The grass had still the green of May,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And still the unblacken'd elms were gay;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The kine were resting in the shade,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The flies a summer-murmur made.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bright was the morn and south the air;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The soft-couch'd cattle were as fair<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As those which pastured by the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That old-world morn, in Sicily,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When on the beach the Cyclops lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And Galatea from the bay<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mock'd her poor lovelorn giant's lay.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Behold," I said, "the painter's sphere!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The limits of his art appear.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The passing group, the summer-morn,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The grass, the elms, that blossom'd thorn<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_238" id="Page_238">[238]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Those cattle couch'd, or, as they rise,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their shining flanks, their liquid eyes&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These, or much greater things, but caught<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like these, and in one aspect brought!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In outward semblance he must give<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A moment's life of things that live;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then let him choose his moment well,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With power divine its story tell."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Still we walk'd on, in thoughtful mood,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And now upon the bridge we stood.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Full of sweet breathings was the air,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of sudden stirs and pauses fair.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down o'er the stately bridge the breeze<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Came rustling from the garden-trees<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And on the sparkling waters play'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Light-plashing waves an answer made,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And mimic boats their haven near'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beyond, the Abbey-towers appear'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By mist and chimneys unconfined,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Free to the sweep of light and wind;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While through their earth-moor'd nave below<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Another breath of wind doth blow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sound as of wandering breeze&mdash;but sound<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In laws by human artists bound.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"The world of music!" I exclaim'd:&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"This breeze that rustles by, that famed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Abbey recall it! what a sphere<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Large and profound, hath genius here!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The inspired musician what a range,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What power of passion, wealth of change!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some source of feeling he must choose<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And its lock'd fount of beauty use,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_239" id="Page_239">[239]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">And through the stream of music tell<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its else unutterable spell;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To choose it rightly is his part,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And press into its inmost heart.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"<i>Miserere, Domine!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">The words are utter'd, and they flee.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deep is their penitential moan,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mighty their pathos, but 'tis gone.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They have declared the spirit's sore<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sore load, and words can do no more.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beethoven takes them then&mdash;those two<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poor, bounded words&mdash;and makes them new;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Infinite makes them, makes them young;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Transplants them to another tongue,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where they can now, without constraint,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pour all the soul of their complaint,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And roll adown a channel large<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The wealth divine they have in charge.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Page after page of music turn,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And still they live and still they burn,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Eternal, passion-fraught, and free&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Miserere, Domine!</i>"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Onward we moved, and reach'd the Ride<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where gaily flows the human tide.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Afar, in rest the cattle lay;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We heard, afar, faint music play;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But agitated, brisk, and near,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Men, with their stream of life, were here.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some hang upon the rails, and some<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On foot behind them go and come.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This through the Ride upon his steed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Goes slowly by, and this at speed.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_240" id="Page_240">[240]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">The young, the happy, and the fair,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The old, the sad, the worn, were there;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some vacant, and some musing went,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And some in talk and merriment.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nods, smiles, and greetings, and farewells!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And now and then, perhaps, there swells<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A sigh, a tear&mdash;but in the throng<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All changes fast, and hies along.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hies, ah, from whence, what native ground?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And to what goal, what ending, bound?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Behold, at last the poet's sphere!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But who," I said, "suffices here?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"For, ah! so much he has to do;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Be painter and musician too!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The aspect of the moment show,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The feeling of the moment know!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The aspect not, I grant, express<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Clear as the painter's art can dress;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The feeling not, I grant, explore<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So deep as the musician's lore&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But clear as words can make revealing,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And deep as words can follow feeling.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, ah! then comes his sorest spell<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of toil&mdash;he must life's <i>movement</i> tell!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The thread which binds it all in one,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And not its separate parts alone.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The <i>movement</i> he must tell of life,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its pain and pleasure, rest and strife;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His eye must travel down, at full,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The long, unpausing spectacle;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With faithful unrelaxing force<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Attend it from its primal source,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_241" id="Page_241">[241]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">From change to change and year to year<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Attend it of its mid career,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Attend it to the last repose<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And solemn silence of its close.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"The cattle rising from the grass<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His thought must follow where they pass;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The penitent with anguish bow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His thought must follow through the crowd.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yes! all this eddying, motley throng<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That sparkles in the sun along,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Girl, statesman, merchant, soldier bold,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Master and servant, young and old,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Grave, gay, child, parent, husband, wife,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He follows home, and lives their life.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"And many, many are the souls<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Life's movement fascinates, controls;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It draws them on, they cannot save<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their feet from its alluring wave;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They cannot leave it, they must go<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With its unconquerable flow.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But ah! how few, of all that try<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This mighty march, do aught but die!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For ill-endow'd for such a way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ill-stored in strength, in wits, are they.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They faint, they stagger to and fro,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And wandering from the stream they go;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In pain, in terror, in distress,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They see, all round, a wilderness.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sometimes a momentary gleam<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They catch of the mysterious stream;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sometimes, a second's space, their ear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The murmur of its waves doth hear.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_242" id="Page_242">[242]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">That transient glimpse in song they say,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But not as painter can pourtray&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That transient sound in song they tell,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But not, as the musician, well.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And when at last their snatches cease,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And they are silent and at peace,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The stream of life's majestic whole<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath ne'er been mirror'd on their soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Only a few the life-stream's shore<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With safe unwandering feet explore;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Untired its movement bright attend,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Follow its windings to the end.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then from its brimming waves their eye<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Drinks up delighted ecstasy,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And its deep-toned, melodious voice<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For ever makes their ear rejoice.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They speak! the happiness divine<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They feel, runs o'er in every line;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its spell is round them like a shower&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It gives them pathos, gives them power.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No painter yet hath such a way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor no musician made, as they,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And gather'd on immortal knolls<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Such lovely flowers for cheering souls.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beethoven, Raphael, cannot reach<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The charm which Homer, Shakespeare, teach<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To these, to these, their thankful race<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gives, then, the first, the fairest place;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And brightest is their glory's sheen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For greatest hath their labour been."</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_243" id="Page_243">[243]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="PERSISTENCY_OF_POETRY" id="PERSISTENCY_OF_POETRY"></a>PERSISTENCY OF POETRY</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Though the Muse be gone away,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though she move not earth to-day,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Souls, erewhile who caught her word,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah! still harp on what they heard.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="A_CAUTION_TO_POETS" id="A_CAUTION_TO_POETS"></a>A CAUTION TO POETS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What poets feel not, when they make,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A pleasure in creating,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The world, in <i>its</i> turn, will not take<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pleasure in contemplating.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_YOUTH_OF_NATURE" id="THE_YOUTH_OF_NATURE"></a>THE YOUTH OF NATURE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Raised are the dripping oars,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Silent the boat! the lake,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lovely and soft as a dream,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Swims in the sheen of the moon.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mountains stand at its head<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Clear in the pure June-night,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But the valleys are flooded with haze.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rydal and Fairfield are there;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the shadow Wordsworth lies dead.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So it is, so it will be for aye.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nature is fresh as of old,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is lovely; a mortal is dead.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The spots which recall him survive,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For he lent a new life to these hills.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Pillar still broods o'er the fields<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_244" id="Page_244">[244]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which border Ennerdale Lake,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And Egremont sleeps by the sea.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The gleam of The Evening Star<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Twinkles on Grasmere no more,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But ruin'd and solemn and grey<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The sheepfold of Michael survives;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And, far to the south, the heath<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still blows in the Quantock coombs,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By the favourite waters of Ruth.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These survive!&mdash;yet not without pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pain and dejection to-night,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can I feel that their poet is gone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He grew old in an age he condemn'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He look'd on the rushing decay<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the times which had shelter'd his youth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Felt the dissolving throes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of a social order he loved;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Outlived his brethren, his peers;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And, like the Theban seer,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Died in his enemies' day.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Cold bubbled the spring of Tilphusa,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Copais lay bright in the moon,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Helicon glass'd in the lake<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its firs, and afar rose the peaks<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Parnassus, snowily clear;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thebes was behind him in flames,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the clang of arms in his ear,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When his awe-struck captors led<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Theban seer to the spring.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tiresias drank and died.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor did reviving Thebes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See such a prophet again.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_245" id="Page_245">[245]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Well may we mourn, when the head<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of a sacred poet lies low<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In an age which can rear them no more!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The complaining millions of men<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Darken in labour and pain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But he was a priest to us all<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the wonder and bloom of the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which we saw with his eyes, and were glad.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He is dead, and the fruit-bearing day<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of his race is past on the earth;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And darkness returns to our eyes.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For, oh! is it you, is it you,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Moonlight, and shadow, and lake,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And mountains, that fill us with joy,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or the poet who sings you so well?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is it you, O beauty, O grace,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O charm, O romance, that we feel,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or the voice which reveals what you are?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are ye, like daylight and sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shared and rejoiced in by all?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or are ye immersed in the mass<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of matter, and hard to extract,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or sunk at the core of the world<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Too deep for the most to discern?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like stars in the deep of the sky,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which arise on the glass of the sage,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But are lost when their watcher is gone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"They are here"&mdash;I heard, as men heard<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In Mysian Ida the voice<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the Mighty Mother, or Crete,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The murmur of Nature reply<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_246" id="Page_246">[246]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Loveliness, magic, and grace,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They are here! they are set in the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They abide; and the finest of souls<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath not been thrill'd by them all,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor the dullest been dead to them quite.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The poet who sings them may die,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But they are immortal and live,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For they are the life of the world.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Will ye not learn it, and know,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When ye mourn that a poet is dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That the singer was less than his themes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Life, and emotion, and I?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"More than the singer are these.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Weak is the tremor of pain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That thrills in his mournfullest chord<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To that which once ran through his soul.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cold the elation of joy<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In his gladdest, airiest song,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To that which of old in his youth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fill'd him and made him divine.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hardly his voice at its best<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gives us a sense of the awe,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The vastness, the grandeur, the gloom<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the unlit gulph of himself.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Ye know not yourselves; and your bards&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The clearest, the best, who have read<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Most in themselves&mdash;have beheld<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Less than they left unreveal'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ye express not yourselves;&mdash;can you make<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With marble, with colour, with word,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What charm'd you in others re-live?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can thy pencil, O artist! restore<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_247" id="Page_247">[247]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">The figure, the bloom of thy love,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As she was in her morning of spring?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Canst thou paint the ineffable smile<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of her eyes as they rested on thine?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can the image of life have the glow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The motion of life itself?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Yourselves and your fellows ye know not; and me,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mateless, the one, will ye know?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Will ye scan me, and read me, and tell<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the thoughts that ferment in my breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My longing, my sadness, my joy?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Will ye claim for your great ones the gift<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To have render'd the gleam of my skies,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To have echoed the moan of my seas,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Utter'd the voice of my hills?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When your great ones depart, will ye say:<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>All things have suffer'd a loss,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Nature is hid in their grave?</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Race after race, man after man,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have thought that my secret was theirs,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have dream'd that I lived but for them,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That they were my glory and joy.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;They are dust, they are changed, they are gone!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I remain."<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_YOUTH_OF_MAN" id="THE_YOUTH_OF_MAN"></a>THE YOUTH OF MAN</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">We, O Nature, depart,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou survivest us! this,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This, I know, is the law.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yes! but more than this,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou who seest us die<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_248" id="Page_248">[248]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seest us change while we live;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seest our dreams, one by one,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seest our errors depart;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Watchest us, Nature! throughout,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mild and inscrutably calm.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Well for us that we change!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Well for us that the power<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which in our morning-prime<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Saw the mistakes of our youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sweet, and forgiving, and good,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sees the contrition of age!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Behold, O Nature, this pair!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See them to-night where they stand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not with the halo of youth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crowning their brows with its light,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not with the sunshine of hope,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not with the rapture of spring,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which they had of old, when they stood<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Years ago at my side<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In this self-same garden, and said:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"We are young, and the world is ours;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man, man is the king of the world!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fools that these mystics are<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who prate of Nature! for she<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath neither beauty, nor warmth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor life, nor emotion, nor power.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But man has a thousand gifts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the generous dreamer invests<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The senseless world with them all.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nature is nothing; her charm<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lives in our eyes which can paint,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lives in our hearts which can feel."<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_249" id="Page_249">[249]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Thou, O Nature, wast mute,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mute as of old! days flew,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Days and years; and Time<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With the ceaseless stroke of his wings<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Brush'd off the bloom from their soul.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Clouded and dim grew their eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Languid their heart&mdash;for youth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quicken'd its pulses no more.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Slowly, within the walls<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of an ever-narrowing world,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They droop'd, they grew blind, they grew old.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thee and their youth in thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nature! they saw no more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Murmur of living,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stir of existence,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Soul of the world!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Make, oh, make yourselves felt<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the dying spirit of youth!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Come, like the breath of the spring!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Leave not a human soul<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To grow old in darkness and pain!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only the living can feel you,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But leave us not while we live!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Here they stand to-night&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here, where this grey balustrade<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crowns the still valley; behind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is the castled house, with its woods,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which shelter'd their childhood&mdash;the sun<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On its ivied windows; a scent<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the grey-wall'd gardens, a breath<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the fragrant stock and the pink,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_250" id="Page_250">[250]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Perfumes the evening air.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their children play on the lawns.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They stand and listen; they hear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The children's shouts, and at times,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Faintly, the bark of a dog<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From a distant farm in the hills.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nothing besides! in front<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The wide, wide valley outspreads<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the dim horizon, reposed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the twilight, and bathed in dew,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Corn-field and hamlet and copse<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Darkening fast; but a light,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Far off, a glory of day,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still plays on the city spires;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And there in the dusk by the walls,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With the grey mist marking its course<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through the silent, flowery land,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On, to the plains, to the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Floats the imperial stream.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Well I know what they feel!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They gaze, and the evening wind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Plays on their faces; they gaze&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Airs from the Eden of youth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Awake and stir in their soul;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The past returns&mdash;they feel<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What they are, alas! what they were.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They, not Nature, are changed.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Well I know what they feel!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Hush, for tears<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Begin to steal to their eyes!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hush, for fruit<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Grows from such sorrow as theirs!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_251" id="Page_251">[251]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And they remember,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With piercing, untold anguish,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The proud boasting of their youth.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And they feel how Nature was fair.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the mists of delusion,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the scales of habit,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fall away from their eyes;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And they see, for a moment,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stretching out, like the desert<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In its weary, unprofitable length,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their faded, ignoble lives.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">While the locks are yet brown on thy head,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While the soul still looks through thine eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While the heart still pours<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mantling blood to thy cheek,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sink, O youth, in thy soul!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yearn to the greatness of Nature;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rally the good in the depths of thyself!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="PALLADIUM" id="PALLADIUM"></a>PALLADIUM</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Set where the upper streams of Simois flow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was the Palladium, high 'mid rock and wood;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Hector was in Ilium, far below,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fought, and saw it not&mdash;but there it stood!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">It stood, and sun and moonshine rain'd their light<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the pure columns of its glen-built hall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Backward and forward roll'd the waves of fight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Round Troy&mdash;but while this stood, Troy could not fall.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So, in its lovely moonlight, lives the soul.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mountains surround it, and sweet virgin air;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_252" id="Page_252">[252]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cold plashing, past it, crystal waters roll;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We visit it by moments, ah, too rare!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We shall renew the battle in the plain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To-morrow;&mdash;red with blood will Xanthus be;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hector and Ajax will be there again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Helen will come upon the wall to see.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then we shall rust in shade, or shine in strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fluctuate 'twixt blind hopes and blind despairs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fancy that we put forth all our life,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And never know how with the soul it fares.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Still doth the soul, from its lone fastness high,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon our life a ruling effluence send.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And when it fails, fight as we will, we die;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And while it lasts, we cannot wholly end.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="PROGRESS" id="PROGRESS"></a>PROGRESS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The Master stood upon the mount, and taught.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He saw a fire in his disciples' eyes;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"The old law," they cried, "is wholly come to nought,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behold the new world rise!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Was it," the Lord then said, "with scorn ye saw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The old law observed by Scribes and Pharisees?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I say unto you, see <i>ye</i> keep that law<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More faithfully than these!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Too hasty heads for ordering worlds, alas!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Think not that I to annul the law have will'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No jot, no tittle from the law shall pass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till all have been fulfill'd."<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_253" id="Page_253">[253]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So Christ said eighteen hundred years ago.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And what then shall be said to those to-day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who cry aloud to lay the old world low<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To clear the new world's way?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Religious fervours! ardour misapplied!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hence, hence," they cry, "ye do but keep man blind!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But keep him self-immersed, preoccupied,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lame the active mind!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah! from the old world let some one answer give:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Scorn ye this world, their tears, their inward cares?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I say unto you, see that <i>your</i> souls live<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A deeper life than theirs!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Say ye: 'The spirit of man has found new roads,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we must leave the old faiths, and walk therein'?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Leave then the Cross as ye have left carved gods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But guard the fire within!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Bright else and fast the stream of life may roll,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And no man may the other's hurt behold;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet each will have one anguish&mdash;his own soul<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which perishes of cold."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Here let that voice make end; then, let a strain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From a far lonelier distance, like the wind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be heard, floating through heaven, and fill again<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These men's profoundest mind:<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Children of men! the unseen Power, whose eye<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For ever doth accompany mankind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hath look'd on no religion scornfully<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That men did ever find.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Which has not taught weak wills how much they can?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which has not fall'n on the dry heart like rain?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_254" id="Page_254">[254]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which has not cried to sunk, self-weary man:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Thou must be born again!</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Children of men! not that your age excel<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In pride of life the ages of your sires,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But that ye think clear, feel deep, bear fruit well,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Friend of man desires."<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="REVOLUTIONS" id="REVOLUTIONS"></a>REVOLUTIONS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Before man parted for this earthly strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While yet upon the verge of heaven he stood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">God put a heap of letters in his hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bade him make with them what word he could.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And man has turn'd them many times; made Greece,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rome, England, France;&mdash;yes, nor in vain essay'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Way after way, changes that never cease!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The letters have combined, something was made.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But ah! an inextinguishable sense<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Haunts him that he has not made what he should;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That he has still, though old, to recommence,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Since he has not yet found the word God would.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And empire after empire, at their height<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of sway, have felt this boding sense come on;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have felt their huge frames not constructed right,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And droop'd, and slowly died upon their throne.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">One day, thou say'st, there will at last appear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The word, the order, which God meant should be.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Ah! we shall know <i>that</i> well when it comes near;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The band will quit man's heart, he will breathe free.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_255" id="Page_255">[255]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="SELF-DEPENDENCE" id="SELF-DEPENDENCE"></a>SELF-DEPENDENCE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Weary of myself, and sick of asking<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What I am, and what I ought to be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At this vessel's prow I stand, which bears me<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forwards, forwards, o'er the starlit sea.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And a look of passionate desire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er the sea and to the stars I send:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Ye who from my childhood up have calm'd me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Calm me, ah, compose me to the end!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Ah, once more," I cried, "ye stars, ye waters,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On my heart your mighty charm renew;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still, still let me, as I gaze upon you,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Feel my soul becoming vast like you!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">From the intense, clear, star-sown vault of heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the lit sea's unquiet way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the rustling night-air came the answer:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Wouldst thou <i>be</i> as these are? <i>Live</i> as they.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Unaffrighted by the silence round them,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Undistracted by the sights they see,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These demand not that the things without them<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yield them love, amusement, sympathy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"And with joy the stars perform their shining,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the sea its long moon-silver'd roll;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For self-poised they live, nor pine with noting<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All the fever of some differing soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Bounded by themselves, and unregardful<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In what state God's other works may be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In their own tasks all their powers pouring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These attain the mighty life you see."<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_256" id="Page_256">[256]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O air-born voice! long since, severely clear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A cry like thine in mine own heart I hear:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Resolve to be thyself; and know that he,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who finds himself, loses his misery!"<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="MORALITY" id="MORALITY"></a>MORALITY</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">We cannot kindle when we will<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The fire which in the heart resides;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The spirit bloweth and is still,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In mystery our soul abides.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But tasks in hours of insight will'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can be through hours of gloom fulfill'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">With aching hands and bleeding feet<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We dig and heap, lay stone on stone;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We bear the burden and the heat<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the long day, and wish 'twere done.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not till the hours of light return,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All we have built do we discern.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Then, when the clouds are off the soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When thou dost bask in Nature's eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ask, how <i>she</i> view'd thy self-control,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy struggling, task'd morality&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nature, whose free, light, cheerful air,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Oft made thee, in thy gloom, despair.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And she, whose censure thou dost dread,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose eye thou wast afraid to seek,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See, on her face a glow is spread,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A strong emotion on her cheek!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Ah, child!" she cries, "that strife divine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whence was it, for it is not mine?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_257" id="Page_257">[257]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"There is no effort on <i>my</i> brow&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I do not strive, I do not weep;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I rush with the swift spheres and glow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In joy, and when I will, I sleep.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet that severe, that earnest air,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I saw, I felt it once&mdash;but where?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"I knew not yet the gauge of time,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor wore the manacles of space;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I felt it in some other clime,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I saw it in some other place.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Twas when the heavenly house I trod,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And lay upon the breast of God."<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="A_SUMMER_NIGHT" id="A_SUMMER_NIGHT"></a>A SUMMER NIGHT</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In the deserted, moon-blanch'd street,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How lonely rings the echo of my feet!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Those windows, which I gaze at, frown,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Silent and white, unopening down,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Repellent as the world;&mdash;but see,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A break between the housetops shows<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The moon! and, lost behind her, fading dim<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Into the dewy dark obscurity<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down at the far horizon's rim,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Doth a whole tract of heaven disclose!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And to my mind the thought<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is on a sudden brought<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of a past night, and a far different scene.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Headlands stood out into the moonlit deep<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As clearly as at noon;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The spring-tide's brimming flow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heaved dazzlingly between;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_258" id="Page_258">[258]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Houses, with long white sweep,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Girdled the glistening bay;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Behind, through the soft air,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The blue haze-cradled mountains spread away,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The night was far more fair&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But the same restless pacings to and fro,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the same vainly throbbing heart was there,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the same bright, calm moon.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And the calm moonlight seems to say:<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Hast thou then still the old unquiet breast,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Which neither deadens into rest,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Nor ever feels the fiery glow</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>That whirls the spirit from itself away,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>But fluctuates to and fro,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Never by passion quite possess'd</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>And never quite benumb'd by the world's sway?</i>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And I, I know not if to pray<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still to be what I am, or yield and be<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like all the other men I see.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For most men in a brazen prison live,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where, in the sun's hot eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With heads bent o'er their toil, they languidly<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their lives to some unmeaning taskwork give,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dreaming of nought beyond their prison-wall.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And as, year after year,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fresh products of their barren labour fall<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From their tired hands, and rest<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Never yet comes more near,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gloom settles slowly down over their breast;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And while they try to stem<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The waves of mournful thought by which they are prest,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_259" id="Page_259">[259]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Death in their prison reaches them,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unfreed, having seen nothing, still unblest.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And the rest, a few,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Escape their prison and depart<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the wide ocean of life anew.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There the freed prisoner, where'er his heart<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Listeth, will sail;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor doth he know how there prevail,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Despotic on that sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Trade-winds which cross it from eternity.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Awhile he holds some false way, undebarr'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By thwarting signs, and braves<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The freshening wind and blackening waves.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And then the tempest strikes him; and between<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The lightning-bursts is seen<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only a driving wreck,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the pale master on his spar-strewn deck<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With anguish'd face and flying hair<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Grasping the rudder hard,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still bent to make some port he knows not where,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still standing for some false, impossible shore.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And sterner comes the roar<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of sea and wind, and through the deepening gloom<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fainter and fainter wreck and helmsman loom,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And he too disappears, and comes no more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Is there no life, but these alone?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Madman or slave, must man be one?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Plainness and clearness without shadow of stain!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Clearness divine!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ye heavens, whose pure dark regions have no sign<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of languor, though so calm, and, though so great,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_260" id="Page_260">[260]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are yet untroubled and unpassionate;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who, though so noble, share in the world's toil,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And, though so task'd, keep free from dust and soil!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I will not say that your mild deeps retain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A tinge, it may be, of their silent pain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who have long'd deeply once, and long'd in vain&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But I will rather say that you remain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A world above man's head, to let him see<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How boundless might his soul's horizons be,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How vast, yet of what clear transparency!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How it were good to abide there, and breathe free;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How fair a lot to fill<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is left to each man still!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_BURIED_LIFE" id="THE_BURIED_LIFE"></a>THE BURIED LIFE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Light flows our war of mocking words, and yet,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behold, with tears mine eyes are wet!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I feel a nameless sadness o'er me roll.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yes, yes, we know that we can jest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We know, we know that we can smile!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But there's a something in this breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To which thy light words bring no rest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thy gay smiles no anodyne.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Give me thy hand, and hush awhile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And turn those limpid eyes on mine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And let me read there, love! thy inmost soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Alas! is even love too weak<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To unlock the heart, and let it speak?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are even lovers powerless to reveal<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To one another what indeed they feel?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_261" id="Page_261">[261]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">I knew the mass of men conceal'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their thoughts, for fear that if reveal'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They would by other men be met<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With blank indifference, or with blame reproved;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I knew they lived and moved<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Trick'd in disguises, alien to the rest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of men, and alien to themselves&mdash;and yet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The same heart beats in every human breast!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But we, my love!&mdash;doth a like spell benumb<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our hearts, our voices?&mdash;must we too be dumb?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah! well for us, if even we,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even for a moment, can get free<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our heart, and have our lips unchain'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For that which seals them hath been deep-ordain'd!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Fate, which foresaw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How frivolous a baby man would be&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By what distractions he would be possess'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How he would pour himself in every strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And well-nigh change his own identity&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That it might keep from his capricious play<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His genuine self, and force him to obey<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even in his own despite his being's law,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bade through the deep recesses of our breast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The unregarded river of our life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pursue with indiscernible flow its way;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that we should not see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The buried stream, and seem to be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Eddying at large in blind uncertainty,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though driving on with it eternally.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But often, in the world's most crowded streets,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But often, in the din of strife,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_262" id="Page_262">[262]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">There rises an unspeakable desire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">After the knowledge of our buried life;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A thirst to spend our fire and restless force<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In tracking out our true, original course;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A longing to inquire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the mystery of this heart which beats<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So wild, so deep in us&mdash;to know<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whence our lives come and where they go.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And many a man in his own breast then delves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But deep enough, alas! none ever mines.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we have been on many thousand lines,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we have shown, on each, spirit and power;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But hardly have we, for one little hour,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Been on our own line, have we been ourselves&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hardly had skill to utter one of all<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The nameless feelings that course through our breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But they course on for ever unexpress'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And long we try in vain to speak and act<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our hidden self, and what we say and do<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is eloquent, is well&mdash;but 'tis not true!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then we will no more be rack'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With inward striving, and demand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of all the thousand nothings of the hour<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their stupefying power;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah yes, and they benumb us at our call!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet still, from time to time, vague and forlorn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the soul's subterranean depth upborne<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As from an infinitely distant land,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come airs, and floating echoes, and convey<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A melancholy into all our day.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Only&mdash;but this is rare&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When a belov&eacute;d hand is laid in ours,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_263" id="Page_263">[263]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">When, jaded with the rush and glare<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the interminable hours,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our eyes can in another's eyes read clear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When our world-deafen'd ear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is by the tones of a loved voice caress'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A bolt is shot back somewhere in our breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And a lost pulse of feeling stirs again.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The eye sinks inward, and the heart lies plain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And what we mean, we say, and what we would, we know.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A man becomes aware of his life's flow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hears its winding murmur; and he sees<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The meadows where it glides, the sun, the breeze.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And there arrives a lull in the hot race<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wherein he doth for ever chase<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That flying and elusive shadow, rest.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An air of coolness plays upon his face,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And an unwonted calm pervades his breast.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then he thinks he knows<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hills where his life rose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the sea where it goes.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="LINES" id="LINES"></a>LINES<br /><br />

WRITTEN IN KENSINGTON GARDENS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In this lone, open glade I lie,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Screen'd by deep boughs on either hand;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And at its end, to stay the eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Those black-crown'd, red-boled pine-trees stand!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Birds here make song, each bird has his,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Across the girdling city's hum.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_264" id="Page_264">[264]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">How green under the boughs it is!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How thick the tremulous sheep-cries come!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sometimes a child will cross the glade<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To take his nurse his broken toy;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sometimes a thrush flit overhead<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Deep in her unknown day's employ.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Here at my feet what wonders pass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What endless, active life is here!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What blowing daisies, fragrant grass!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An air-stirr'd forest, fresh and clear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Scarce fresher is the mountain-sod<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the tired angler lies, stretch'd out,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, eased of basket and of rod,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Counts his day's spoil, the spotted trout.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In the huge world, which roars hard by,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be others happy if they can!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But in my helpless cradle I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was breathed on by the rural Pan.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I, on men's impious uproar hurl'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Think often, as I hear them rave,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That peace has left the upper world<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now keeps only in the grave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet here is peace for ever new!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When I who watch them am away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still all things in this glade go through<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The changes of their quiet day.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then to their happy rest they pass!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The flowers upclose, the birds are fed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The night comes down upon the grass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The child sleeps warmly in his bed.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_265" id="Page_265">[265]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Calm soul of all things! make it mine<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To feel, amid the city's jar,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That there abides a peace of thine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man did not make, and cannot mar.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The will to neither strive nor cry,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The power to feel with others give!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Calm, calm me more! nor let me die<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before I have begun to live.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="A_WISH" id="A_WISH"></a>A WISH</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I ask not that my bed of death<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From bands of greedy heirs be free;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For these besiege the latest breath<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of fortune's favour'd sons, not me.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I ask not each kind soul to keep<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tearless, when of my death he hears.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Let those who will, if any, weep!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There are worse plagues on earth than tears.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I ask but that my death may find<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The freedom to my life denied;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ask but the folly of mankind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then, then at last, to quit my side.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Spare me the whispering, crowded room,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The friends who come, and gape, and go;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The ceremonious air of gloom&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All, which makes death a hideous show!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Nor bring, to see me cease to live,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some doctor full of phrase and fame,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To shake his sapient head, and give<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The ill he cannot cure a name.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_266" id="Page_266">[266]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Nor fetch, to take the accustom'd toll<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the poor sinner bound for death,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His brother-doctor of the soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To canvass with official breath<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The future and its viewless things&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That undiscover'd mystery<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which one who feels death's winnowing wings<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Must needs read clearer, sure, than he!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Bring none of these; but let me be,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While all around in silence lies,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Moved to the window near, and see<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Once more, before my dying eyes,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Bathed in the sacred dews of morn<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The wide aerial landscape spread&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The world which was ere I was born,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The world which lasts when I am dead;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Which never was the friend of <i>one</i>,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor promised love it could not give,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But lit for all its generous sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And lived itself, and made us live.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">There let me gaze, till I become<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In soul, with what I gaze on, wed!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To feel the universe my home;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To have before my mind&mdash;instead<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Of the sick room, the mortal strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The turmoil for a little breath&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The pure eternal course of life,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not human combatings with death!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_267" id="Page_267">[267]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Thus feeling, gazing, might I grow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Composed, refresh'd, ennobled, clear;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then willing let my spirit go<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To work or wait elsewhere or here!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THE_FUTURE" id="THE_FUTURE"></a>THE FUTURE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">A wanderer is man from his birth.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He was born in a ship<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the breast of the river of Time;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Brimming with wonder and joy<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He spreads out his arms to the light,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rivets his gaze on the banks of the stream.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">As what he sees is, so have his thoughts been.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whether he wakes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where the snowy mountainous pass,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Echoing the screams of the eagles,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hems in its gorges the bed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the new-born clear-flowing stream;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whether he first sees light<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where the river in gleaming rings<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sluggishly winds through the plain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whether in sound of the swallowing sea&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As is the world on the banks,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So is the mind of the man.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Vainly does each, as he glides,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fable and dream<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the lands which the river of Time<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Had left ere he woke on its breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or shall reach when his eyes have been closed.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_268" id="Page_268">[268]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only the tract where he sails<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He wots of; only the thoughts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Raised by the objects he passes, are his.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Who can see the green earth any more<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As she was by the sources of Time?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who imagines her fields as they lay<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the sunshine, unworn by the plough?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who thinks as they thought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The tribes who then roam'd on her breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Her vigorous, primitive sons?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What girl<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Now reads in her bosom as clear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As Rebekah read, when she sate<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At eve by the palm-shaded well?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who guards in her breast<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As deep, as pellucid a spring<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of feeling, as tranquil, as sure?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What bard,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At the height of his vision, can deem<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of God, of the world, of the soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With a plainness as near,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As flashing as Moses felt<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When he lay in the night by his flock<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the starlit Arabian waste?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can rise and obey<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The beck of the Spirit like him?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">This tract which the river of Time<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Now flows through with us, is the plain.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gone is the calm of its earlier shore.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Border'd by cities and hoarse<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_269" id="Page_269">[269]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">With a thousand cries is its stream.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And we on its breast, our minds<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are confused as the cries which we hear,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Changing and shot as the sights which we see.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And we say that repose has fled<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For ever the course of the river of Time.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That cities will crowd to its edge<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In a blacker, incessanter line;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That the din will be more on its banks,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Denser the trade on its stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Flatter the plain where it flows,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fiercer the sun overhead.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That never will those on its breast<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See an ennobling sight,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Drink of the feeling of quiet again.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But what was before us we know not,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And we know not what shall succeed.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Haply, the river of Time&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As it grows, as the towns on its marge<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fling their wavering lights<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On a wider, statelier stream&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">May acquire, if not the calm<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of its early mountainous shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet a solemn peace of its own.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And the width of the waters, the hush<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the grey expanse where he floats,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Freshening its current and spotted with foam<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As it draws to the Ocean, may strike<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Peace to the soul of the man on its breast&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As the pale waste widens around him,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_270" id="Page_270">[270]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">As the banks fade dimmer away,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As the stars come out, and the night-wind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Brings up the stream<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Murmurs and scents of the infinite sea.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_271" id="Page_271">[271]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="ELEGIAC_POEMS" id="ELEGIAC_POEMS"></a>ELEGIAC POEMS</h2>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_272" id="Page_272">[272]</a></span><br /></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_273" id="Page_273">[273]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="THE_SCHOLAR-GIPSY16" id="THE_SCHOLAR-GIPSY16"></a>THE SCHOLAR-GIPSY<a name="FNanchor_16_18" id="FNanchor_16_18"></a><a href="#Footnote_16_18" class="fnanchor">[16]</a></h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Go, for they call you, shepherd, from the hill;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Go, shepherd, and untie the wattled cotes!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No longer leave thy wistful flock unfed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor let thy bawling fellows rack their throats,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor the cropp'd herbage shoot another head.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But when the fields are still,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the tired men and dogs all gone to rest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And only the white sheep are sometimes seen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cross and recross the strips of moon-blanch'd green,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, shepherd, and again begin the quest!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Here, where the reaper was at work of late&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In this high field's dark corner, where he leaves<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His coat, his basket, and his earthen cruse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the sun all morning binds the sheaves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then here, at noon, comes back his stores to use&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here will I sit and wait,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While to my ear from uplands far away<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The bleating of the folded flocks is borne,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With distant cries of reapers in the corn&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All the live murmur of a summer's day.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Screen'd is this nook o'er the high, half-reap'd field,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And here till sun-down, shepherd! will I be.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the thick corn the scarlet poppies peep,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_274" id="Page_274">[274]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And round green roots and yellowing stalks I see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pale pink convolvulus in tendrils creep;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And air-swept lindens yield<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their scent, and rustle down their perfumed showers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of bloom on the bent grass where I am laid,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bower me from the August sun with shade;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the eye travels down to Oxford's towers.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And near me on the grass lies Glanvil's book&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, let me read the oft-read tale again!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The story of the Oxford scholar poor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of pregnant parts and quick inventive brain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who, tired of knocking at preferment's door,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">One summer-morn forsook<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His friends, and went to learn the gipsy-lore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And roam'd the world with that wild brotherhood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And came, as most men deem'd, to little good,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But came to Oxford and his friends no more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But once, years after, in the country-lanes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Two scholars, whom at college erst he knew,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Met him, and of his way of life enquired;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whereat he answer'd, that the gipsy-crew,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His mates, had arts to rule as they desired<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The workings of men's brains,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they can bind them to what thoughts they will.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"And I," he said, "the secret of their art,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When fully learn'd, will to the world impart;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But it needs heaven-sent moments for this skill."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">This said, he left them, and return'd no more.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But rumours hung about the country-side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That the lost Scholar long was seen to stray,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seen by rare glimpses, pensive and tongue-tied,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_275" id="Page_275">[275]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">In hat of antique shape, and cloak of grey,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The same the gipsies wore.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shepherds had met him on the Hurst in spring;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At some lone alehouse in the Berkshire moors,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the warm ingle-bench, the smock-frock'd boors<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had found him seated at their entering,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But, 'mid their drink and clatter, he would fly.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I myself seem half to know thy looks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And put the shepherds, wanderer! on thy trace;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And boys who in lone wheatfields scare the rooks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I ask if thou hast pass'd their quiet place;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or in my boat I lie<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Moor'd to the cool bank in the summer-heats,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Mid wide grass meadows which the sunshine fills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And watch the warm, green-muffled Cumner hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wonder if thou haunt'st their shy retreats.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">For most, I know, thou lov'st retired ground!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thee at the ferry Oxford riders blithe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Returning home on summer-nights, have met<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crossing the stripling Thames at Bab-lock-hithe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Trailing in the cool stream thy fingers wet,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As the punt's rope chops round;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And leaning backward in a pensive dream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fostering in thy lap a heap of flowers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pluck'd in shy fields and distant Wychwood bowers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thine eyes resting on the moonlit stream.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And then they land, and thou art seen no more!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Maidens, who from the distant hamlets come<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To dance around the Fyfield elm in May,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oft through the darkening fields have seen thee roam,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or cross a stile into the public way.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_276" id="Page_276">[276]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i1">Oft thou hast given them store<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of flowers&mdash;the frail-leaf'd, white anemony,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dark bluebells drench'd with dews of summer eves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And purple orchises with spotted leaves&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But none hath words she can report of thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And, above Godstow Bridge, when hay-time's here<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In June, and many a scythe in sunshine flames,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Men who through those wide fields of breezy grass<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where black-wing'd swallows haunt the glittering Thames,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To bathe in the abandon'd lasher pass,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have often pass'd thee near<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sitting upon the river bank o'ergrown;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mark'd thine outlandish garb, thy figure spare,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy dark vague eyes, and soft abstracted air&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, when they came from bathing, thou wast gone!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">At some lone homestead in the Cumner hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where at her open door the housewife darns,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou hast been seen, or hanging on a gate<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To watch the threshers in the mossy barns.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Children, who early range these slopes and late<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For cresses from the rills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have known thee eying, all an April-day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The springing pastures and the feeding kine;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And mark'd thee, when the stars come out and shine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the long dewy grass move slow away.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In autumn, on the skirts of Bagley Wood&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where most the gipsies by the turf-edged way<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pitch their smoked tents, and every bush you see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With scarlet patches tagg'd and shreds of grey,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Above the forest-ground called Thessaly&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The blackbird, picking food,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_277" id="Page_277">[277]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sees thee, nor stops his meal, nor fears at all;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So often has he known thee past him stray,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rapt, twirling in thy hand a wither'd spray,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And waiting for the spark from heaven to fall.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And once, in winter, on the causeway chill<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where home through flooded fields foot-travellers go,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have I not pass'd thee on the wooden bridge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wrapt in thy cloak and battling with the snow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy face tow'rd Hinksey and its wintry ridge?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And thou hast climb'd the hill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And gain'd the white brow of the Cumner range;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Turn'd once to watch, while thick the snowflakes fall,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The line of festal light in Christ-Church hall&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then sought thy straw in some sequester'd grange.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But what&mdash;I dream! Two hundred years are flown<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Since first thy story ran through Oxford halls,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the grave Glanvil did the tale inscribe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That thou wert wander'd from the studious walls<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To learn strange arts, and join a gipsy-tribe;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And thou from earth art gone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Long since, and in some quiet churchyard laid&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some country-nook, where o'er thy unknown grave<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tall grasses and white flowering nettles wave,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under a dark, red-fruited yew-tree's shade.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">&mdash;No, no, thou hast not felt the lapse of hours!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For what wears out the life of mortal men?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis that from change to change their being rolls;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis that repeated shocks, again, again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Exhaust the energy of strongest souls<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And numb the elastic powers.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_278" id="Page_278">[278]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till having used our nerves with bliss and teen,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And tired upon a thousand schemes our wit,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the just-pausing Genius we remit<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our worn-out life, and are&mdash;what we have been.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou hast not lived, why should'st thou perish, so?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou hadst <i>one</i> aim, <i>one</i> business, <i>one</i> desire;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Else wert thou long since number'd with the dead!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Else hadst thou spent, like other men, thy fire!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The generations of thy peers are fled,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And we ourselves shall go;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou possessest an immortal lot,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we imagine thee exempt from age<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And living as thou liv'st on Glanvil's page,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because thou hadst&mdash;what we, alas! have not.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">For early didst thou leave the world, with powers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fresh, undiverted to the world without,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Firm to their mark, not spent on other things;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Free from the sick fatigue, the languid doubt,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which much to have tried, in much been baffled, brings.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O life unlike to ours!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who fluctuate idly without term or scope,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of whom each strives, nor knows for what he strives,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And each half lives a hundred different lives;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who wait like thee, but not, like thee, in hope.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou waitest for the spark from heaven! and we,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Light half-believers of our casual creeds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who never deeply felt, nor clearly will'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose insight never has borne fruit in deeds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose vague resolves never have been fulfill'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For whom each year we see<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_279" id="Page_279">[279]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Breeds new beginnings, disappointments new;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who hesitate and falter life away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lose to-morrow the ground won to-day&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah! do not we, wanderer! await it too?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes, we await it!&mdash;but it still delays,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then we suffer! and amongst us one,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who most has suffer'd, takes dejectedly<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His seat upon the intellectual throne;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all his store of sad experience he<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lays bare of wretched days;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tells us his misery's birth and growth and signs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And how the dying spark of hope was fed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And how the breast was soothed, and how the head,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all his hourly varied anodynes.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">This for our wisest! and we others pine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wish the long unhappy dream would end,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And waive all claim to bliss, and try to bear;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With close-lipp'd patience for our only friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sad patience, too near neighbour to despair&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But none has hope like thine!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou through the fields and through the woods dost stray,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Roaming the country-side, a truant boy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nursing thy project in unclouded joy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And every doubt long blown by time away.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O born in days when wits were fresh and clear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And life ran gaily as the sparkling Thames;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before this strange disease of modern life,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With its sick hurry, its divided aims,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Its heads o'ertax'd, its palsied hearts, was rife&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fly hence, our contact fear!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_280" id="Page_280">[280]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still fly, plunge deeper in the bowering wood!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Averse, as Dido did with gesture stern<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From her false friend's approach in Hades turn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wave us away, and keep thy solitude!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Still nursing the unconquerable hope,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still clutching the inviolable shade,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With a free, onward impulse brushing through,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By night, the silver'd branches of the glade&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far on the forest-skirts, where none pursue,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On some mild pastoral slope<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Emerge, and resting on the moonlit pales<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Freshen thy flowers as in former years<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With dew, or listen with enchanted ears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the dark dingles, to the nightingales!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But fly our paths, our feverish contact fly!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For strong the infection of our mental strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which, though it gives no bliss, yet spoils for rest;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we should win thee from thy own fair life,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like us distracted, and like us unblest.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Soon, soon thy cheer would die,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy hopes grow timorous, and unfix'd thy powers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thy clear aims be cross and shifting made;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then thy glad perennial youth would fade,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fade, and grow old at last, and die like ours.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then fly our greetings, fly our speech and smiles!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;As some grave Tyrian trader, from the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Descried at sunrise an emerging prow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lifting the cool-hair'd creepers stealthily,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fringes of a southward-facing brow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Among the &AElig;g&aelig;an isles;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_281" id="Page_281">[281]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And saw the merry Grecian coaster come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Freighted with amber grapes, and Chian wine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Green, bursting figs, and tunnies steep'd in brine&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And knew the intruders on his ancient home,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The young light-hearted masters of the waves&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And snatch'd his rudder, and shook out more sail;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And day and night held on indignantly<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er the blue Midland waters with the gale,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Betwixt the Syrtes and soft Sicily,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To where the Atlantic raves<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Outside the western straits; and unbent sails<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There, where down cloudy cliffs, through sheets of foam,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shy traffickers, the dark Iberians come;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the beach undid his corded bales.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="THYRSIS17" id="THYRSIS17"></a>THYRSIS<a name="FNanchor_17_19" id="FNanchor_17_19"></a><a href="#Footnote_17_19" class="fnanchor">[17]</a></h2>

<h3><span class="smcap">A Monody</span>, <i>to commemorate the author's friend</i>,<br />
<span class="smcap">Arthur Hugh Clough</span>, <i>who died at Florence</i>, 1861.</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">How changed is here each spot man makes or fills!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the two Hinkseys nothing keeps the same;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The village street its haunted mansion lacks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from the sign is gone Sibylla's name,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from the roofs the twisted chimney-stacks&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are ye too changed, ye hills?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">See, 'tis no foot of unfamiliar men<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To-night from Oxford up your pathway strays!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here came I often, often, in old days&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thyrsis and I; we still had Thyrsis then.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_282" id="Page_282">[282]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Runs it not here, the track by Childsworth Farm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Past the high wood, to where the elm-tree crowns<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hill behind whose ridge the sunset flames?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The signal-elm, that looks on Ilsley Downs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Vale, the three lone weirs, the youthful Thames?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This winter-eve is warm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Humid the air! leafless, yet soft as spring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The tender purple spray on copse and briers!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that sweet city with her dreaming spires,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She needs not June for beauty's heightening,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Lovely all times she lies, lovely to-night!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Only, methinks, some loss of habit's power<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Befalls me wandering through this upland dim.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once pass'd I blindfold here, at any hour;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now seldom come I, since I came with him.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That single elm-tree bright<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against the west&mdash;I miss it! is it gone?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We prized it dearly; while it stood, we said,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our friend, the Gipsy-Scholar, was not dead;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While the tree lived, he in these fields lived on.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Too rare, too rare, grow now my visits here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But once I knew each field, each flower, each stick;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And with the country-folk acquaintance made<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By barn in threshing-time, by new-built rick.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here, too, our shepherd-pipes we first assay'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah me! this many a year<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My pipe is lost, my shepherd's holiday!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Needs must I lose them, needs with heavy heart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the world and wave of men depart;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Thyrsis of his own will went away.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">It irk'd him to be here, he could not rest.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He loved each simple joy the country yields,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_283" id="Page_283">[283]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">He loved his mates; but yet he could not keep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For that a shadow lour'd on the fields,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here with the shepherds and the silly sheep.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some life of men unblest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He knew, which made him droop, and fill'd his head.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He went; his piping took a troubled sound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of storms that rage outside our happy ground;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He could not wait their passing, he is dead.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So, some tempestuous morn in early June,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the year's primal burst of bloom is o'er,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before the roses and the longest day&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When garden-walks and all the grassy floor<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With blossoms red and white of fallen May<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And chestnut-flowers are strewn&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So have I heard the cuckoo's parting cry,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the wet field, through the vext garden-trees,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come with the volleying rain and tossing breeze:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The bloom is gone, and with the bloom go I!</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Too quick despairer, wherefore wilt thou go?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soon will the high Midsummer pomps come on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soon will the musk carnations break and swell,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soon shall we have gold-dusted snapdragon,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sweet-William with his homely cottage-smell,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And stocks in fragrant blow;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Roses that down the alleys shine afar,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And open, jasmine-muffled lattices,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And groups under the dreaming garden-trees,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the full moon, and the white evening-star.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He hearkens not! light comer, he is flown!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What matters it? next year he will return,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we shall have him in the sweet spring-days,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_284" id="Page_284">[284]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">With whitening hedges, and uncrumpling fern,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And blue-bells trembling by the forest-ways,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And scent of hay new-mown.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Thyrsis never more we swains shall see;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">See him come back, and cut a smoother reed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And blow a strain the world at last shall heed&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For Time, not Corydon, hath conquer'd thee!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Alack, for Corydon no rival now!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when Sicilian shepherds lost a mate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some good survivor with his flute would go,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Piping a ditty sad for Bion's fate;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And cross the unpermitted ferry's flow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And relax Pluto's brow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And make leap up with joy the beauteous head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Proserpine, among whose crowned hair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are flowers first open'd on Sicilian air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And flute his friend, like Orpheus, from the dead.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O easy access to the hearer's grace<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When Dorian shepherds sang to Proserpine!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For she herself had trod Sicilian fields,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She knew the Dorian water's gush divine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She knew each lily white which Enna yields,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Each rose with blushing face;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She loved the Dorian pipe, the Dorian strain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But ah, of our poor Thames she never heard!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her foot the Cumner cowslips never stirr'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we should tease her with our plaint in vain!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Well! wind-dispersed and vain the words will be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet, Thyrsis, let me give my grief its hour<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the old haunt, and find our tree-topp'd hill!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who, if not I, for questing here hath power?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_285" id="Page_285">[285]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know the wood which hides the daffodil,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I know the Fyfield tree,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know what white, what purple fritillaries<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The grassy harvest of the river-fields,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Above by Ensham, down by Sandford, yields,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And what sedged brooks are Thames's tributaries;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I know these slopes; who knows them if not I?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But many a dingle on the loved hill-side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With thorns once studded, old, white-blossom'd trees,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where thick the cowslips grew, and far descried<br /></span>
<span class="i0">High tower'd the spikes of purple orchises,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath since our day put by<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The coronals of that forgotten time;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down each green bank hath gone the ploughboy's team,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And only in the hidden brookside gleam<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Primroses, orphans of the flowery prime.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Where is the girl, who by the boatman's door,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Above the locks, above the boating throng,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unmoor'd our skiff when through the Wytham flats,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Red loosestrife and blond meadow-sweet among<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And darting swallows and light water-gnats,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We track'd the shy Thames shore?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where are the mowers, who, as the tiny swell<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of our boat passing heaved the river-grass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stood with suspended scythe to see us pass?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They all are gone, and thou art gone as well!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes, thou art gone! and round me too the night<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In ever-nearing circle weaves her shade.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I see her veil draw soft across the day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I feel her slowly chilling breath invade<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The cheek grown thin, the brown hair sprent with grey;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_286" id="Page_286">[286]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">I feel her finger light<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Laid pausefully upon life's headlong train;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The foot less prompt to meet the morning dew,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The heart less bounding at emotion new,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hope, once crush'd, less quick to spring again.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And long the way appears, which seem'd so short<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the less practised eye of sanguine youth;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And high the mountain-tops, in cloudy air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mountain-tops where is the throne of Truth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tops in life's morning-sun so bright and bare!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unbreachable the fort<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the long-batter'd world uplifts its wall;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And strange and vain the earthly turmoil grows,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And near and real the charm of thy repose,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And night as welcome as a friend would fall.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But hush! the upland hath a sudden loss<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of quiet!&mdash;Look, adown the dusk hill-side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A troop of Oxford hunters going home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As in old days, jovial and talking, ride!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From hunting with the Berkshire hounds they come.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quick! let me fly, and cross<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into yon farther field!&mdash;'Tis done; and see,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Back'd by the sunset, which doth glorify<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The orange and pale violet evening-sky,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bare on its lonely ridge, the Tree! the Tree!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I take the omen! Eve lets down her veil,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The white fog creeps from bush to bush about,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The west unflushes, the high stars grow bright,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the scatter'd farms the lights come out.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I cannot reach the signal-tree to-night,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet, happy omen, hail!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_287" id="Page_287">[287]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hear it from thy broad lucent Arno-vale<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(For there thine earth-forgetting eyelids keep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The morningless and unawakening sleep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the flowery oleanders pale),<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hear it, O Thyrsis, still our tree is there!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah, vain! These English fields, this upland dim,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These brambles pale with mist engarlanded,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That lone, sky-pointing tree, are not for him;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To a boon southern country he is fled,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And now in happier air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wandering with the great Mother's train divine<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(And purer or more subtle soul than thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I trow, the mighty Mother doth not see)<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Within a folding of the Apennine,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou hearest the immortal chants of old!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Putting his sickle to the perilous grain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the hot cornfield of the Phrygian king,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For thee the Lityerses-song again<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Young Daphnis with his silver voice doth sing;<a name="FNanchor_18_20" id="FNanchor_18_20"></a><a href="#Footnote_18_20" class="fnanchor">[18]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sings his Sicilian fold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His sheep, his hapless love, his blinded eyes&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And how a call celestial round him rang,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And heavenward from the fountain-brink he sprang,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all the marvel of the golden skies.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">There thou art gone, and me thou leavest here<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sole in these fields! yet will I not despair.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Despair I will not, while I yet descry<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Neath the mild canopy of English air<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That lonely tree against the western sky.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still, still these slopes, 'tis clear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our Gipsy-Scholar haunts, outliving thee!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_288" id="Page_288">[288]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fields where soft sheep from cages pull the hay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Woods with anemonies in flower till May,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Know him a wanderer still; then why not me?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">A fugitive and gracious light he seeks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shy to illumine; and I seek it too.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This does not come with houses or with gold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With place, with honour, and a flattering crew;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis not in the world's market bought and sold&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But the smooth-slipping weeks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Drop by, and leave its seeker still untired;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Out of the heed of mortals he is gone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He wends unfollow'd, he must house alone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet on he fares, by his own heart inspired.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou too, O Thyrsis, on like quest wast bound;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou wanderedst with me for a little hour!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Men gave thee nothing; but this happy quest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If men esteem'd thee feeble, gave thee power,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If men procured thee trouble, gave thee rest.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And this rude Cumner ground,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Its fir-topped Hurst, its farms, its quiet fields,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here cam'st thou in thy jocund youthful time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here was thine height of strength, thy golden prime!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And still the haunt beloved a virtue yields.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What though the music of thy rustic flute<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Kept not for long its happy, country tone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lost it too soon, and learnt a stormy note<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of men contention-tost, of men who groan,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which task'd thy pipe too sore, and tired thy throat&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It fail'd, and thou wast mute!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet hadst thou alway visions of our light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And long with men of care thou couldst not stay,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_289" id="Page_289">[289]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And soon thy foot resumed its wandering way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Left human haunt, and on alone till night.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">
<a name="corr1" id="corr1"></a><a class="correction" href="#cn1" title="The number 2 removed from the front of
the line">Too rare</a>, too rare, grow now my visits here!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Mid city-noise, not, as with thee of yore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thyrsis! in reach of sheep-bells is my home.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Then through the great town's harsh, heart-wearying roar,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let in thy voice a whisper often come,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To chase fatigue and fear:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Why faintest thou? I wander'd till I died.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Roam on! The light we sought is shining still.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Dost thou ask proof? Our tree yet crowns the hill,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Our Scholar travels yet the loved hill-side.</i><br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="MEMORIAL_VERSES" id="MEMORIAL_VERSES"></a>MEMORIAL VERSES</h2>

<h3>APRIL, 1850</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Goethe in Weimar sleeps, and Greece,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Long since, saw Byron's struggle cease.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But one such death remain'd to come;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The last poetic voice is dumb&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We stand to-day by Wordsworth's tomb.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">When Byron's eyes were shut in death,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We bow'd our head and held our breath.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He taught us little; but our soul<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Had <i>felt</i> him like the thunder's roll.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With shivering heart the strife we saw<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of passion with eternal law;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And yet with reverential awe<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We watch'd the fount of fiery life<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which served for that Titanic strife.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_290" id="Page_290">[290]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">When Goethe's death was told, we said:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sunk, then, is Europe's sagest head.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Physician of the iron age,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Goethe has done his pilgrimage.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He took the suffering human race,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He read each wound, each weakness clear;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And struck his finger on the place,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And said: <i>Thou ailest here, and here!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">He look'd on Europe's dying hour<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of fitful dream and feverish power;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His eye plunged down the weltering strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The turmoil of expiring life&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He said: <i>The end is everywhere,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Art still has truth, take refuge there!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">And he was happy, if to know<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Causes of things, and far below<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His feet to see the lurid flow<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of terror, and insane distress,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And headlong fate, be happiness.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And Wordsworth!&mdash;Ah, pale ghosts, rejoice!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For never has such soothing voice<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Been to your shadowy world convey'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Since erst, at morn, some wandering shade<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heard the clear song of Orpheus come<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through Hades, and the mournful gloom.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wordsworth has gone from us&mdash;and ye,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, may ye feel his voice as we!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He too upon a wintry clime<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Had fallen&mdash;on this iron time<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of doubts, disputes, distractions, fears.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He found us when the age had bound<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our souls in its benumbing round;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_291" id="Page_291">[291]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">He spoke, and loosed our heart in tears.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He laid us as we lay at birth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the cool flowery lap of earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Smiles broke from us and we had ease;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The hills were round us, and the breeze<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Went o'er the sun-lit fields again;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our foreheads felt the wind and rain.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our youth return'd; for there was shed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On spirits that had long been dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Spirits dried up and closely furl'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The freshness of the early world.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah! since dark days still bring to light<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man's prudence and man's fiery might,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Time may restore us in his course<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Goethe's sage mind and Byron's force;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But where will Europe's latter hour<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Again find Wordsworth's healing power?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Others will teach us how to dare,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And against fear our breast to steel;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Others will strengthen us to bear&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But who, ah! who, will make us feel?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The cloud of mortal destiny,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Others will front it fearlessly&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But who, like him, will put it by?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Keep fresh the grass upon his grave<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O Rotha, with thy living wave!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sing him thy best! for few or none<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hears thy voice right, now he is gone.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_292" id="Page_292">[292]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="STANZAS" id="STANZAS"></a>STANZAS<br />

IN MEMORY OF EDWARD QUILLINAN</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I saw him sensitive in frame,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I knew his spirits low;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And wish'd him health, success, and fame&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I do not wish it now.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For these are all their own reward,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And leave no good behind;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They try us, oftenest make us hard,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Less modest, pure, and kind.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Alas! yet to the suffering man,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In this his mortal state,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Friends could not give what fortune can&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Health, ease, a heart elate.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But he is now by fortune foil'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No more; and we retain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The memory of a man unspoil'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sweet, generous, and humane&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">With all the fortunate have not,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With gentle voice and brow.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Alive, we would have changed his lot,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We would not change it now.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="STANZAS_FROM_CARNAC" id="STANZAS_FROM_CARNAC"></a>STANZAS FROM CARNAC</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Far on its rocky knoll descried<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Saint Michael's chapel cuts the sky.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I climb'd;&mdash;beneath me, bright and wide,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lay the lone coast of Brittany.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_293" id="Page_293">[293]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Bright in the sunset, weird and still,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It lay beside the Atlantic wave,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As though the wizard Merlin's will<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet charm'd it from his forest-grave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Behind me on their grassy sweep,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bearded with lichen, scrawl'd and grey,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The giant stones of Carnac sleep,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the mild evening of the May.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">No priestly stern procession now<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Moves through their rows of pillars old;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No victims bleed, no Druids bow&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sheep make the daisied aisles their fold.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">From bush to bush the cuckoo flies,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The orchis red gleams everywhere;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gold furze with broom in blossom vies,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The blue-bells perfume all the air.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And o'er the glistening, lonely land,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rise up, all round, the Christian spires;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The church of Carnac, by the strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Catches the westering sun's last fires.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And there, across the watery way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See, low above the tide at flood,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The sickle-sweep of Quiberon Bay,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose beach once ran with loyal blood!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And beyond that, the Atlantic wide!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All round, no soul, no boat, no hail;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, on the horizon's verge descried,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hangs, touch'd with light, one snowy sail!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_294" id="Page_294">[294]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah! where is he, who should have come<a name="FNanchor_19_21" id="FNanchor_19_21"></a><a href="#Footnote_19_21" class="fnanchor">[19]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where that far sail is passing now,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Past the Loire's mouth, and by the foam<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Finist&egrave;re's unquiet brow,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Home, round into the English wave?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;He tarries where the Rock of Spain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mediterranean waters lave;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He enters not the Atlantic main.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Oh, could he once have reach'd this air<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Freshen'd by plunging tides, by showers!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have felt this breath he loved, of fair<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cool northern fields, and grass, and flowers!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He long'd for it&mdash;press'd on.&mdash;In vain!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At the Straits fail'd that spirit brave.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The south was parent of his pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The south is mistress of his grave.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="A_SOUTHERN_NIGHT" id="A_SOUTHERN_NIGHT"></a>A SOUTHERN NIGHT</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The sandy spits, the shore-lock'd lakes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Melt into open, moonlit sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The soft Mediterranean breaks<br /></span>
<span class="i4">At my feet, free.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Dotting the fields of corn and vine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like ghosts the huge, gnarl'd olives stand.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Behind, that lovely mountain-line!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">While, by the strand,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Cette, with its glistening houses white,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Curves with the curving beach away<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_295" id="Page_295">[295]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">To where the lighthouse beacons bright<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Far in the bay.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah! such a night, so soft, so lone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So moonlit, saw me once of yore<a name="FNanchor_20_22" id="FNanchor_20_22"></a><a href="#Footnote_20_22" class="fnanchor">[20]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wander unquiet, and my own<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Vext heart deplore.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But now that trouble is forgot;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy memory, thy pain, to-night,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My brother! and thine early lot,<a name="FNanchor_21_23" id="FNanchor_21_23"></a><a href="#Footnote_21_23" class="fnanchor">[21]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i4">Possess me quite.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The murmur of this Midland deep<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is heard to-night around thy grave,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There, where Gibraltar's cannon'd steep<br /></span>
<span class="i4">O'erfrowns the wave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For there, with bodily anguish keen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With Indian heats at last fordone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With public toil and private teen&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Thou sank'st, alone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Slow to a stop, at morning grey,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I see the smoke-crown'd vessel come;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Slow round her paddles dies away<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The seething foam.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">A boat is lower'd from her side;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, gently place him on the bench!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That spirit&mdash;if all have not yet died&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">A breath might quench.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Is this the eye, the footstep fast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mien of youth we used to see,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poor, gallant boy!&mdash;for such thou wast,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Still art, to me.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_296" id="Page_296">[296]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The limbs their wonted tasks refuse;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The eyes are glazed, thou canst not speak;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And whiter than thy white burnous<br /></span>
<span class="i4">That wasted cheek!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Enough! The boat, with quiet shock,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unto its haven coming nigh,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Touches, and on Gibraltar's rock<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Lands thee to die.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah me! Gibraltar's strand is far,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But farther yet across the brine<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy dear wife's ashes buried are,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Remote from thine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For there, where morning's sacred fount<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its golden rain on earth confers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The snowy Himalayan Mount<br /></span>
<span class="i4">O'ershadows hers.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Strange irony of fate, alas,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which, for two jaded English, saves,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When from their dusty life they pass,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Such peaceful graves!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In cities should we English lie,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where cries are rising ever new,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And men's incessant stream goes by&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">We who pursue<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Our business with unslackening stride,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Traverse in troops, with care-fill'd breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The soft Mediterranean side,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The Nile, the East,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_297" id="Page_297">[297]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">And see all sights from pole to pole,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And glance, and nod, and bustle by,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And never once possess our soul<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Before we die.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Not by those hoary Indian hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not by this gracious Midland sea<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose floor to-night sweet moonshine fills,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Should our graves be.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Some sage, to whom the world was dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And men were specks, and life a play;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who made the roots of trees his bed,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And once a day<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">With staff and gourd his way did bend<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To villages and homes of man,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For food to keep him till he end<br /></span>
<span class="i4">His mortal span<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And the pure goal of being reach;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hoar-headed, wrinkled, clad in white,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Without companion, without speech,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">By day and night<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Pondering God's mysteries untold,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And tranquil as the glacier-snows<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He by those Indian mountains old<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Might well repose.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Some grey crusading knight austere,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who bore Saint Louis company,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And came home hurt to death, and here<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Landed to die;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_298" id="Page_298">[298]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some youthful troubadour, whose tongue<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fill'd Europe once with his love-pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who here outworn had sunk, and sung<br /></span>
<span class="i4">His dying strain;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Some girl, who here from castle-bower,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With furtive step and cheek of flame,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Twixt myrtle-hedges all in flower<br /></span>
<span class="i4">By moonlight came<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">To meet her pirate-lover's ship;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And from the wave-kiss'd marble stair<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beckon'd him on, with quivering lip<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And floating hair;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And lived some moons in happy trance,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then learnt his death and pined away&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Such by these waters of romance<br /></span>
<span class="i4">'Twas meet to lay.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But you&mdash;a grave for knight or sage,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Romantic, solitary, still,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O spent ones of a work-day age!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Befits you ill.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">So sang I; but the midnight breeze,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down to the brimm'd, moon-charmed main,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Comes softly through the olive-trees,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And checks my strain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I think of her, whose gentle tongue<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All plaint in her own cause controll'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of thee I think, my brother! young<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In heart, high-soul'd<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_299" id="Page_299">[299]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">That comely face, that cluster'd brow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That cordial hand, that bearing free,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I see them still, I see them now,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Shall always see!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And what but gentleness untired,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And what but noble feeling warm,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wherever shown, howe'er inspired,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Is grace, is charm?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What else is all these waters are,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What else is steep'd in lucid sheen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What else is bright, what else is fair,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">What else serene?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Mild o'er her grave, ye mountains, shine!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gently by his, ye waters, glide!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To that in you which is divine<br /></span>
<span class="i4">They were allied.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="HAWORTH_CHURCHYARD" id="HAWORTH_CHURCHYARD"></a>HAWORTH CHURCHYARD</h2>

<h3>APRIL, 1855</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Where, under Loughrigg, the stream<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Rotha sparkles through fields<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Vested for ever with green,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Four years since, in the house<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of a gentle spirit, now dead&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wordsworth's son-in-law, friend&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I saw the meeting of two<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gifted women.<a name="FNanchor_22_24" id="FNanchor_22_24"></a><a href="#Footnote_22_24" class="fnanchor">[22]</a> The one,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Brilliant with recent renown,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_300" id="Page_300">[300]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Young, unpractised, had told<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With a master's accent her feign'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Story of passionate life;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The other, maturer in fame,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Earning, she too, her praise<br /></span>
<span class="i2">First in fiction, had since<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Widen'd her sweep, and survey'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">History, politics, mind.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The two held converse; they wrote<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In a book which of world-famous souls<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Kept the memorial;&mdash;bard,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Warrior, statesman, had sign'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their names; chief glory of all,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Scott had bestow'd there his last<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Breathings of song, with a pen<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tottering, a death-stricken hand.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Hope at that meeting smiled fair.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Years in number, it seem'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lay before both, and a fame<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heighten'd, and multiplied power.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Behold! The elder, to-day,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lies expecting from death,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In mortal weakness, a last<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Summons! the younger is dead!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">First to the living we pay<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mournful homage;&mdash;the Muse<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gains not an earth-deafen'd ear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Hail to the steadfast soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which, unflinching and keen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wrought to erase from its depth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mist and illusion and fear!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_301" id="Page_301">[301]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hail to the spirit which dared<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Trust its own thoughts, before yet<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Echoed her back by the crowd!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hail to the courage which gave<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Voice to its creed, ere the creed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Won consecration from time!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Turn we next to the dead.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;How shall we honour the young,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The ardent, the gifted? how mourn?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Console we cannot, her ear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is deaf. Far northward from here,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In a churchyard high 'mid the moors<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Yorkshire, a little earth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stops it for ever to praise.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Where, behind Keighley, the road<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Up to the heart of the moors<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Between heath-clad showery hills<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Runs, and colliers' carts<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poach the deep ways coming down,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And a rough, grimed race have their homes&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There on its slope is built<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The moorland town. But the church<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stands on the crest of the hill,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lonely and bleak;&mdash;at its side<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The parsonage-house and the graves.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Strew with laurel the grave<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the early-dying! Alas,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Early she goes on the path<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the silent country, and leaves<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Half her laurels unwon,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dying too soon!&mdash;yet green<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_302" id="Page_302">[302]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Laurels she had, and a course<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Short, but redoubled by fame.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And not friendless, and not<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only with strangers to meet,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Faces ungreeting and cold,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou, O mourn'd one, to-day<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Enterest the house of the grave!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Those of thy blood, whom thou lov'dst,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have preceded thee&mdash;young,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Loving, a sisterly band;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some in art, some in gift<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Inferior&mdash;all in fame.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They, like friends, shall receive<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This comer, greet her with joy;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Welcome the sister, the friend;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hear with delight of thy fame!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Round thee they lie&mdash;the grass<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Blows from their graves to thy own!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She, whose genius, though not<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Puissant like thine, was yet<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sweet and graceful;&mdash;and she<br /></span>
<span class="i2">(How shall I sing her?) whose soul<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Knew no fellow for might,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Passion, vehemence, grief,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Daring, since Byron died,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That world-famed son of fire&mdash;she, who sank<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Baffled, unknown, self-consumed;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose too bold dying song<a name="FNanchor_23_25" id="FNanchor_23_25"></a><a href="#Footnote_23_25" class="fnanchor">[23]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stirr'd, like a clarion-blast, my soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Of one, too, I have heard,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A brother&mdash;sleeps he here?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_303" id="Page_303">[303]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of all that gifted race<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not the least gifted; young,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unhappy, eloquent&mdash;the child<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of many hopes, of many tears.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O boy, if here thou sleep'st, sleep well!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On thee too did the Muse<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bright in thy cradle smile;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But some dark shadow came<br /></span>
<span class="i2">(I know not what) and interposed.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Sleep, O cluster of friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sleep!&mdash;or only when May,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Brought by the west-wind, returns<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Back to your native heaths,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the plover is heard on the moors,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yearly awake to behold<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The opening summer, the sky,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The shining moorland&mdash;to hear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The drowsy bee, as of old,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hum o'er the thyme, the grouse<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Call from the heather in bloom!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sleep, or only for this<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Break your united repose!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="EPILOGUE" id="EPILOGUE"></a>EPILOGUE</h2>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">So I sang; but the Muse,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Shaking her head, took the harp&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Stern interrupted my strain,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Angrily smote on the chords.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">April showers<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Rush o'er the Yorkshire moors.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_304" id="Page_304">[304]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i4">Stormy, through driving mist,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Loom the blurr'd hills; the rain<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Lashes the newly-made grave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Unquiet souls!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">&mdash;In the dark fermentation of earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In the never idle workshop of nature,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">In the eternal movement,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ye shall find yourselves again!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="RUGBY_CHAPEL" id="RUGBY_CHAPEL"></a>RUGBY CHAPEL</h2>

<h3><span class="smcap">November</span> 1857</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Coldly, sadly descends<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The autumn-evening. The field<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Strewn with its dank yellow drifts<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of wither'd leaves, and the elms,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fade into dimness apace,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Silent;&mdash;hardly a shout<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From a few boys late at their play!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The lights come out in the street,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the school-room windows;&mdash;but cold,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Solemn, unlighted, austere,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through the gathering darkness, arise<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The chapel-walls, in whose bound<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou, my father! art laid.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">There thou dost lie, in the gloom<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the autumn evening. But ah!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That word, <i>gloom</i>, to my mind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Brings thee back, in the light<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of thy radiant vigour, again;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the gloom of November we pass'd<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_305" id="Page_305">[305]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Days not dark at thy side;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seasons impair'd not the ray<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of thy buoyant cheerfulness clear.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Such thou wast! and I stand<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the autumn evening, and think<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of bygone autumns with thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Fifteen years have gone round<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Since thou arosest to tread,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the summer-morning, the road<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of death, at a call unforeseen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sudden. For fifteen years,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We who till then in thy shade<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rested as under the boughs<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of a mighty oak, have endured<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sunshine and rain as we might,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bare, unshaded, alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lacking the shelter of thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">O strong soul, by what shore<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tarriest thou now? For that force,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Surely, has not been left vain!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Somewhere, surely, afar,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the sounding labour-house vast<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of being, is practised that strength,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Zealous, beneficent, firm!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yes, in some far-shining sphere,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Conscious or not of the past,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still thou performest the word<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the Spirit in whom thou dost live&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Prompt, unwearied, as here!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still thou upraisest with zeal<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The humble good from the ground,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_306" id="Page_306">[306]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sternly repressest the bad!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still, like a trumpet, dost rouse<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Those who with half-open eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tread the border-land dim<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Twixt vice and virtue; reviv'st,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Succourest!&mdash;this was thy work,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This was thy life upon earth.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What is the course of the life<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of mortal men on the earth?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Most men eddy about<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here and there&mdash;eat and drink,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Chatter and love and hate,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gather and squander, are raised<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Aloft, are hurl'd in the dust,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Striving blindly, achieving<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nothing; and then they die&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Perish;&mdash;and no one asks<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who or what they have been,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">More than he asks what waves,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the moonlit solitudes mild<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the midmost Ocean, have swell'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Foam'd for a moment, and gone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And there are some, whom a thirst<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ardent, unquenchable, fires,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not with the crowd to be spent,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not without aim to go round<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In an eddy of purposeless dust,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Effort unmeaning and vain.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah yes! some of us strive<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not without action to die<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fruitless, but something to snatch<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From dull oblivion, nor all<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_307" id="Page_307">[307]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Glut the devouring grave!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We, we have chosen our path&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Path to a clear-purposed goal,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Path of advance!&mdash;but it leads<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A long, steep journey, through sunk<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gorges, o'er mountains in snow.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cheerful, with friends, we set forth&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then, on the height, comes the storm.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thunder crashes from rock<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To rock, the cataracts reply,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lightnings dazzle our eyes.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Roaring torrents have breach'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The track, the stream-bed descends<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the place where the wayfarer once<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Planted his footstep&mdash;the spray<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Boils o'er its borders! aloft<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The unseen snow-beds dislodge<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their hanging ruin; alas,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Havoc is made in our train!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Friends, who set forth at our side,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Falter, are lost in the storm.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We, we only are left!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With frowning foreheads, with lips<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sternly compress'd, we strain on,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On&mdash;and at nightfall at last<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Come to the end of our way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the lonely inn 'mid the rocks;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where the gaunt and taciturn host<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stands on the threshold, the wind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shaking his thin white hairs&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Holds his lantern to scan<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our storm-beat figures, and asks:<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_308" id="Page_308">[308]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whom in our party we bring?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whom we have left in the snow?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Sadly we answer: We bring<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only ourselves! we lost<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sight of the rest in the storm.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hardly ourselves we fought through,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stripp'd, without friends, as we are.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Friends, companions, and train,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The avalanche swept from our side.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But thou would'st not <i>alone</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Be saved, my father! <i>alone</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Conquer and come to thy goal,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Leaving the rest in the wild.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We were weary, and we<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fearful, and we in our march<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fain to drop down and to die.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still thou turnedst, and still<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beckonedst the trembler, and still<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gavest the weary thy hand.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">If, in the paths of the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stones might have wounded thy feet,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Toil or dejection have tried<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy spirit, of that we saw<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nothing&mdash;to us thou wast still<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cheerful, and helpful, and firm!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Therefore to thee it was given<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Many to save with thyself;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And, at the end of thy day,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O faithful shepherd! to come,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bringing thy sheep in thy hand.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_309" id="Page_309">[309]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And through thee I believe<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the noble and great who are gone;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pure souls honour'd and blest<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By former ages, who else&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Such, so soulless, so poor,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is the race of men whom I see&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seem'd but a dream of the heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seem'd but a cry of desire.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yes! I believe that there lived<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Others like thee in the past,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not like the men of the crowd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who all round me to-day<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bluster or cringe, and make life<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hideous, and arid, and vile;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But souls temper'd with fire,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fervent, heroic, and good,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Helpers and friends of mankind.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Servants of God!&mdash;or sons<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shall I not call you? because<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not as servants ye knew<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Your Father's innermost mind,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His, who unwillingly sees<br /></span>
<span class="i2">One of his little ones lost&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yours is the praise, if mankind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hath not as yet in its march<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fainted, and fallen, and died!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">See! In the rocks of the world<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Marches the host of mankind,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A feeble, wavering line.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where are they tending?&mdash;A God<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Marshall'd them, gave them their goal.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, but the way is so long!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_310" id="Page_310">[310]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Years they have been in the wild!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sore thirst plagues them, the rocks,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rising all round, overawe;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Factions divide them, their host<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Threatens to break, to dissolve.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Ah, keep, keep them combined!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Else, of the myriads who fill<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That army, not one shall arrive;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sole they shall stray; in the rocks<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stagger for ever in vain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Die one by one in the waste.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Then, in such hour of need<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of your fainting, dispirited race,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ye, like angels, appear,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Radiant with ardour divine!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beacons of hope, ye appear!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Languor is not in your heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Weakness is not in your word,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Weariness not on your brow.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ye alight in our van! at your voice,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Panic, despair, flee away.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ye move through the ranks, recall<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The stragglers, refresh the outworn,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Praise, re-inspire the brave!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Order, courage, return.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Eyes rekindling, and prayers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Follow your steps as ye go.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ye fill up the gaps in our files,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Strengthen the wavering line,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stablish, continue our march,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On, to the bound of the waste,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On, to the City of God.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_311" id="Page_311">[311]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="HEINES_GRAVE" id="HEINES_GRAVE"></a>HEINE'S GRAVE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"<i><span class="smcap">Henri Heine</span></i>"&mdash;&mdash; 'tis here!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That black tombstone, the name<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Carved there&mdash;no more! and the smooth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Swarded alleys, the limes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Touch'd with yellow by hot<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Summer, but under them still,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In September's bright afternoon,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shadow, and verdure, and cool.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Trim Montmartre! the faint<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Murmur of Paris outside;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crisp everlasting-flowers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yellow and black, on the graves.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Half blind, palsied, in pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hither to come, from the streets'<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Uproar, surely not loath<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wast thou, Heine!&mdash;to lie<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Quiet, to ask for closed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shutters, and darken'd room,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And cool drinks, and an eased<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Posture, and opium, no more;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hither to come, and to sleep<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Under the wings of Renown.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah! not little, when pain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is most quelling, and man<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Easily quell'd, and the fine<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Temper of genius so soon<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thrills at each smart, is the praise,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not to have yielded to pain!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No small boast, for a weak<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_312" id="Page_312">[312]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Son of mankind, to the earth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pinn'd by the thunder, to rear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His bolt-scathed front to the stars;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And, undaunted, retort<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Gainst thick-crashing, insane,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tyrannous tempests of bale,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Arrowy lightnings of soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Hark! through the alley resounds<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mocking laughter! A film<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Creeps o'er the sunshine; a breeze<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ruffles the warm afternoon,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Saddens my soul with its chill.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gibing of spirits in scorn<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shakes every leaf of the grove,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mars the benignant repose<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of this amiable home of the dead.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Bitter spirits, ye claim<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heine?&mdash;Alas, he is yours!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only a moment I long'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here in the quiet to snatch<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From such mates the outworn<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poet, and steep him in calm.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only a moment! I knew<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose he was who is here<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Buried&mdash;I knew he was yours!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, I knew that I saw<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here no sepulchre built<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the laurell'd rock, o'er the blue<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Naples bay, for a sweet<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tender Virgil! no tomb<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On Ravenna sands, in the shade<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Ravenna pines, for a high<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_313" id="Page_313">[313]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Austere Dante! no grave<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By the Avon side, in the bright<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stratford meadows, for thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shakespeare! loveliest of souls,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Peerless in radiance, in joy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What, then, so harsh and malign,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heine! distils from thy life?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poisons the peace of the grave?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I chide with thee not, that thy sharp<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Upbraidings often assail'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">England, my country&mdash;for we,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heavy and sad, for her sons,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Long since, deep in our hearts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Echo the blame of her foes.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We, too, sigh that she flags;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We, too, say that she now&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Scarce comprehending the voice<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of her greatest, golden-mouth'd sons<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of a former age any more&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stupidly travels her round<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of mechanic business, and lets<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Slow die out of her life<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Glory, and genius, and joy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">So thou arraign'st her, her foe;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So we arraign her, her sons.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yes, we arraign her! but she,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The weary Titan, with deaf<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ears, and labour-dimm'd eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Regarding neither to right<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor left, goes passively by,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Staggering on to her goal;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_314" id="Page_314">[314]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bearing on shoulders immense,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Atlante&auml;n, the load,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wellnigh not to be borne,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the too vast orb of her fate.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But was it thou&mdash;I think<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Surely it was!&mdash;that bard<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unnamed, who, Goethe said,<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Had every other gift, but wanted love;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Love, without which the tongue<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Even of angels sounds amiss?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Charm is the glory which makes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Song of the poet divine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Love is the fountain of charm.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How without charm wilt thou draw,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poet! the world to thy way?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not by the lightnings of wit&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not by the thunder of scorn!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">These to the world, too, are given;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wit it possesses, and scorn&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Charm is the poet's alone.<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Hollow and dull are the great,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>And artists envious, and the mob profane.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2">We know all this, we know!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cam'st thou from heaven, O child<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of light! but this to declare?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Alas, to help us forget<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Such barren knowledge awhile,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">God gave the poet his song!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Therefore a secret unrest<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tortured thee, brilliant and bold!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Therefore triumph itself<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_315" id="Page_315">[315]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tasted amiss to thy soul.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Therefore, with blood of thy foes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Trickled in silence thine own.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Therefore the victor's heart<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Broke on the field of his fame.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah! as of old, from the pomp<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Italian Milan, the fair<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Flower of marble of white<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Southern palaces&mdash;steps<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Border'd by statues, and walks<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Terraced, and orange-bowers<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heavy with fragrance&mdash;the blond<br /></span>
<span class="i2">German Kaiser full oft<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Long'd himself back to the fields,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rivers, and high-roof'd towns<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of his native Germany; so,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So, how often! from hot<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Paris drawing-rooms, and lamps<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Blazing, and brilliant crowds,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Starr'd and jewell'd, of men<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Famous, of women the queens<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of dazzling converse&mdash;from fumes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of praise, hot, heady fumes, to the poor brain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That mount, that madden&mdash;how oft<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heine's spirit outworn<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Long'd itself out of the din,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Back to the tranquil, the cool<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Far German home of his youth!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">See! in the May-afternoon,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O'er the fresh, short turf of the Hartz,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A youth, with the foot of youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heine! thou climbest again!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_316" id="Page_316">[316]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Up, through the tall dark firs<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Warming their heads in the sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Chequering the grass with their shade&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Up, by the stream, with its huge<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Moss-hung boulders, and thin<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Musical water half-hid&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Up, o'er the rock-strewn slope,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With the sinking sun, and the air<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Chill, and the shadows now<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Long on the grey hill-side&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the stone-roof'd hut at the top!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Or, yet later, in watch<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the roof of the Brocken-tower<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou standest, gazing!&mdash;to see<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The broad red sun, over field,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Forest, and city, and spire,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And mist-track'd stream of the wide,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wide German land, going down<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In a bank of vapours&mdash;&mdash;again<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Standest, at nightfall, alone!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Or, next morning, with limbs<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rested by slumber, and heart<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Freshen'd and light with the May,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O'er the gracious spurs coming down<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the Lower Hartz, among oaks,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And beechen coverts, and copse<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of hazels green in whose depth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ilse, the fairy transform'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In a thousand water-breaks light<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pours her petulant youth&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Climbing the rock which juts<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O'er the valley, the dizzily perch'd<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_317" id="Page_317">[317]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rock&mdash;to its iron cross<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Once more thou cling'st; to the Cross<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Clingest! with smiles, with a sigh!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Goethe, too, had been there.<a name="FNanchor_24_26" id="FNanchor_24_26"></a><a href="#Footnote_24_26" class="fnanchor">[24]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the long-past winter he came<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the frozen Hartz, with his soul<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Passionate, eager&mdash;his youth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All in ferment!&mdash;but he<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Destined to work and to live<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Left it, and thou, alas!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Only to laugh and to die.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But something prompts me: Not thus<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Take leave of Heine! not thus<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Speak the last word at his grave!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not in pity, and not<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With half censure&mdash;with awe<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hail, as it passes from earth<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Scattering lightnings, that soul!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The Spirit of the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beholding the absurdity of men&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their vaunts, their feats&mdash;let a sardonic smile,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For one short moment, wander o'er his lips.<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>That smile was Heine!</i>&mdash;for its earthly hour<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The strange guest sparkled; now 'tis pass'd away.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">That was Heine! and we,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Myriads who live, who have lived,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What are we all, but a mood,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A single mood, of the life<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the Spirit in whom we exist,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who alone is all things in one?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_318" id="Page_318">[318]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Spirit, who fillest us all!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Spirit, who utterest in each<br /></span>
<span class="i2">New-coming son of mankind<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Such of thy thoughts as thou wilt!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O thou, one of whose moods,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bitter and strange, was the life<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Heine&mdash;his strange, alas,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His bitter life!&mdash;may a life<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Other and milder be mine!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">May'st thou a mood more serene,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Happier, have utter'd in mine!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">May'st thou the rapture of peace<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deep have embreathed at its core;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Made it a ray of thy thought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Made it a beat of thy joy!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="STANZAS_FROM_THE_GRANDE_CHARTREUSE" id="STANZAS_FROM_THE_GRANDE_CHARTREUSE"></a>STANZAS FROM THE GRANDE CHARTREUSE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Through Alpine meadows soft-suffused<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With rain, where thick the crocus blows,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Past the dark forges long disused,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mule-track from Saint Laurent goes.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The bridge is cross'd, and slow we ride,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through forest, up the mountain-side.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The autumnal evening darkens round,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The wind is up, and drives the rain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While, hark! far down, with strangled sound<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Doth the Dead Guier's stream complain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where that wet smoke, among the woods,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Over his boiling cauldron broods.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_319" id="Page_319">[319]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Swift rush the spectral vapours white<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Past limestone scars with ragged pines,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Showing&mdash;then blotting from our sight!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Halt&mdash;through the cloud-drift something shines!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">High in the valley, wet and drear,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The huts of Courrerie appear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2"><i>Strike leftward!</i> cries our guide; and higher<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mounts up the stony forest-way.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At last the encircling trees retire;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Look! through the showery twilight grey<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What pointed roofs are these advance?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A palace of the Kings of France?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Approach, for what we seek is here!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Alight, and sparely sup, and wait<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For rest in this outbuilding near;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then cross the sward and reach that gate.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Knock; pass the wicket! Thou art come<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To the Carthusians' world-famed home.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The silent courts, where night and day<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Into their stone-carved basins cold<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The splashing icy fountains play&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The humid corridors behold!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where, ghostlike in the deepening night,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cowl'd forms brush by in gleaming white.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The chapel, where no organ's peal<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Invests the stern and naked prayer&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With penitential cries they kneel<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And wrestle; rising then, with bare<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And white uplifted faces stand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Passing the Host from hand to hand;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_320" id="Page_320">[320]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Each takes, and then his visage wan<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is buried in his cowl once more.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The cells!&mdash;the suffering Son of Man<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Upon the wall&mdash;the knee-worn floor&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And where they sleep, that wooden bed,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which shall their coffin be, when dead!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The library, where tract and tome<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not to feed priestly pride are there,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To hymn the conquering march of Rome,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor yet to amuse, as ours are!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They paint of souls the inner strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their drops of blood, their death in life.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The garden, overgrown&mdash;yet mild,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See, fragrant herbs are flowering there!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Strong children of the Alpine wild<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose culture is the brethren's care;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of human tasks their only one,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And cheerful works beneath the sun.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Those halls, too, destined to contain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Each its own pilgrim-host of old,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From England, Germany, or Spain&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All are before me! I behold<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The House, the Brotherhood austere!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;And what am I, that I am here?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For rigorous teachers seized my youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And purged its faith, and trimm'd its fire,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Show'd me the high, white star of Truth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There bade me gaze, and there aspire.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Even now their whispers pierce the gloom:<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>What dost thou in this living tomb?</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_321" id="Page_321">[321]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Forgive me, masters of the mind!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At whose behest I long ago<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So much unlearnt, so much resign'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I come not here to be your foe!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I seek these anchorites, not in ruth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To curse and to deny your truth;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Not as their friend, or child, I speak!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But as, on some far northern strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thinking of his own Gods, a Greek<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In pity and mournful awe might stand<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Before some fallen Runic stone&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For both were faiths, and both are gone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Wandering between two worlds, one dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The other powerless to be born,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With nowhere yet to rest my head,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like these, on earth I wait forlorn.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their faith, my tears, the world deride&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I come to shed them at their side.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Oh, hide me in your gloom profound,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ye solemn seats of holy pain!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Take me, cowl'd forms, and fence me round,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Till I possess my soul again;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Till free my thoughts before me roll,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not chafed by hourly false control!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For the world cries your faith is now<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But a dead time's exploded dream;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My melancholy, sciolists say,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is a pass'd mode, an outworn theme&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As if the world had ever had<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A faith, or sciolists been sad!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_322" id="Page_322">[322]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah, if it <i>be</i> pass'd, take away,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At least, the restlessness, the pain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Be man henceforth no more a prey<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To these out-dated stings again!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The nobleness of grief is gone&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, leave us not the fret alone!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But&mdash;if you cannot give us ease&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Last of the race of them who grieve<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here leave us to die out with these<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Last of the people who believe!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Silent, while years engrave the brow;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Silent&mdash;the best are silent now.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Achilles ponders in his tent,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The kings of modern thought are dumb;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Silent they are, though not content,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And wait to see the future come.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">They have the grief men had of yore,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But they contend and cry no more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Our fathers water'd with their tears<br /></span>
<span class="i2">This sea of time whereon we sail,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their voices were in all men's ears<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who pass'd within their puissant hail.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still the same ocean round us raves,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But we stand mute, and watch the waves.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For what avail'd it, all the noise<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And outcry of the former men?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Say, have their sons achieved more joys,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Say, is life lighter now than then?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The sufferers died, they left their pain&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The pangs which tortured them remain.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_323" id="Page_323">[323]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What helps it now, that Byron bore,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With haughty scorn which mock'd the smart,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through Europe to the &AElig;tolian shore<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The pageant of his bleeding heart?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That thousands counted every groan,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And Europe made his woe her own?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What boots it, Shelley! that the breeze<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Carried thy lovely wail away,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Musical through Italian trees<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which fringe thy soft blue Spezzian bay?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Inheritors of thy distress<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have restless hearts one throb the less?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Or are we easier, to have read,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O Obermann! the sad, stern page,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which tells us how thou hidd'st thy head<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From the fierce tempest of thine age<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the lone brakes of Fontainebleau,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or chalets near the Alpine snow?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ye slumber in your silent grave!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The world, which for an idle day<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Grace to your mood of sadness gave,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Long since hath flung her weeds away.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The eternal trifler breaks your spell;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But we&mdash;we learnt your lore too well!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Years hence, perhaps, may dawn an age,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">More fortunate, alas! than we,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which without hardness will be sage,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And gay without frivolity.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sons of the world, oh, speed those years;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, while we wait, allow our tears!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_324" id="Page_324">[324]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Allow them! We admire with awe<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The exulting thunder of your race;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">You give the universe your law,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">You triumph over time and space!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Your pride of life, your tireless powers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We laud them, but they are not ours.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">We are like children rear'd in shade<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beneath some old-world abbey wall,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Forgotten in a forest-glade,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And secret from the eyes of all.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deep, deep the greenwood round them waves,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their abbey, and its close of graves!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But, where the road runs near the stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Oft through the trees they catch a glance<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of passing troops in the sun's beam&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pennon, and plume, and flashing lance!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Forth to the world those soldiers fare,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To life, to cities, and to war!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And through the wood, another way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Faint bugle-notes from far are borne,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where hunters gather, staghounds bay,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Round some fair forest-lodge at morn.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gay dames are there, in sylvan green;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Laughter and cries&mdash;those notes between!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The banners flashing through the trees<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Make their blood dance and chain their eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That bugle-music on the breeze<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Arrests them with a charm'd surprise.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Banner by turns and bugle woo:<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Ye shy recluses, follow too!</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_325" id="Page_325">[325]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">O children, what do ye reply?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"Action and pleasure, will ye roam<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through these secluded dells to cry<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And call us?&mdash;but too late ye come!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Too late for us your call ye blow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose bent was taken long ago.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Long since we pace this shadow'd nave;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We watch those yellow tapers shine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Emblems of hope over the grave,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the high altar's depth divine;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The organ carries to our ear<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its accents of another sphere.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Fenced early in this cloistral round<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of reverie, of shade, of prayer,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How should we grow in other ground?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How can we flower in foreign air?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Pass, banners, pass, and bugles, cease;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And leave our desert to its peace!"<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="STANZAS_IN_MEMORY_OF_THE_AUTHOR_OF" id="STANZAS_IN_MEMORY_OF_THE_AUTHOR_OF"></a>STANZAS IN MEMORY OF THE AUTHOR OF<br />
"OBERMANN"<a name="FNanchor_25_27" id="FNanchor_25_27"></a><a href="#Footnote_25_27" class="fnanchor">[25]</a></h2>

<h3><span class="smcap">November</span>, 1849</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">In front the awful Alpine track<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crawls up its rocky stair;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The autumn storm-winds drive the rack,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Close o'er it, in the air.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_326" id="Page_326">[326]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Behind are the abandon'd baths<a name="FNanchor_26_28" id="FNanchor_26_28"></a><a href="#Footnote_26_28" class="fnanchor">[26]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mute in their meadows lone;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The leaves are on the valley-paths,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The mists are on the Rhone&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The white mists rolling like a sea!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I hear the torrents roar.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Yes, Obermann, all speaks of thee;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I feel thee near once more!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I turn thy leaves! I feel their breath<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Once more upon me roll;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That air of languor, cold, and death,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which brooded o'er thy soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Fly hence, poor wretch, whoe'er thou art,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Condemn'd to cast about,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All shipwreck in thy own weak heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For comfort from without!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">A fever in these pages burns<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beneath the calm they feign;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A wounded human spirit turns,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here, on its bed of pain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yes, though the virgin mountain-air<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fresh through these pages blows;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though to these leaves the glaciers spare<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The soul of their white snows;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Though here a mountain-murmur swells<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of many a dark-bough'd pine;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though, as you read, you hear the bells<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the high-pasturing kine<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_327" id="Page_327">[327]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yet, through the hum of torrent lone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And brooding mountain-bee,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There sobs I know not what ground-tone<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of human agony.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Is it for this, because the sound<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Is fraught too deep with pain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That, Obermann! the world around<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So little loves thy strain?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Some secrets may the poet tell,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For the world loves new ways;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To tell too deep ones is not well&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It knows not what he says.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yet, of the spirits who have reign'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In this our troubled day,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I know but two, who have attain'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Save thee, to see their way.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">By England's lakes, in grey old age,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His quiet home one keeps;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And one, the strong much-toiling sage,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In German Weimar sleeps.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But Wordsworth's eyes avert their ken<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From half of human fate;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And Goethe's course few sons of men<br /></span>
<span class="i2">May think to emulate.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For he pursued a lonely road,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His eyes on Nature's plan;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Neither made man too much a God,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor God too much a man.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_328" id="Page_328">[328]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Strong was he, with a spirit free<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From mists, and sane, and clear;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Clearer, how much! than ours&mdash;yet we<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have a worse course to steer.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For though his manhood bore the blast<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of a tremendous time,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet in a tranquil world was pass'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His tenderer youthful prime.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But we, brought forth and rear'd in hours<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of change, alarm, surprise&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What shelter to grow ripe is ours?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What leisure to grow wise?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Like children bathing on the shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Buried a wave beneath,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The second wave succeeds, before<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We have had time to breathe.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Too fast we live, too much are tried,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Too harass'd, to attain<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wordsworth's sweet calm, or Goethe's wide<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And luminous view to gain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And then we turn, thou sadder sage,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To thee! we feel thy spell!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;The hopeless tangle of our age,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou too hast scann'd it well!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Immoveable thou sittest, still<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As death, composed to bear!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy head is clear, thy feeling chill,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And icy thy despair.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_329" id="Page_329">[329]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yes, as the son of Thetis said,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I hear thee saying now:<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Greater by far than thou art dead;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Strive not! die also thou!</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah! two desires toss about<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The poet's feverish blood.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">One drives him to the world without,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And one to solitude.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2"><i>The glow</i>, he cries, <i>the thrill of life,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Where, where do these abound</i>?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Not in the world, not in the strife<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of men, shall they be found.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">He who hath watch'd, not shared, the strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Knows how the day hath gone.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He only lives with the world's life,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who hath renounced his own.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">To thee we come, then! Clouds are roll'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where thou, O seer! art set;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy realm of thought is drear and cold&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The world is colder yet!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And thou hast pleasures, too, to share<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With those who come to thee&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Balms floating on thy mountain-air,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And healing sights to see.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">How often, where the slopes are green<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On Jaman, hast thou sate<br /></span>
<span class="i2">By some high chalet-door, and seen<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The summer-day grow late;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_330" id="Page_330">[330]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">And darkness steal o'er the wet grass<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With the pale crocus starr'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And reach that glimmering sheet of glass<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beneath the piny sward,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Lake Leman's waters, far below!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And watch'd the rosy light<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fade from the distant peaks of snow;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And on the air of night<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Heard accents of the eternal tongue<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Through the pine branches play&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Listen'd, and felt thyself grow young!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Listen'd and wept&mdash;&mdash;Away!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Away the dreams that but deceive<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And thou, sad guide, adieu!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I go, fate drives me; but I leave<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Half of my life with you.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">We, in some unknown Power's employ,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Move on a rigorous line;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Can neither, when we will, enjoy,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor, when we will, resign.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I in the world must live; but thou,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou melancholy shade!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wilt not, if thou canst see me now,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Condemn me, nor upbraid.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For thou art gone away from earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And place with those dost claim,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Children of the Second Birth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whom the world could not tame;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_331" id="Page_331">[331]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">And with that small, transfigured band,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whom many a different way<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Conducted to their common land,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou learn'st to think as they.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Christian and pagan, king and slave,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Soldier and anchorite,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Distinctions we esteem so grave,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are nothing in their sight.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">They do not ask, who pined unseen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who was on action hurl'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose one bond is, that all have been<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unspotted by the world.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">There without anger thou wilt see<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Him who obeys thy spell<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No more, so he but rest, like thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Unsoil'd!&mdash;and so, farewell.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Farewell!&mdash;Whether thou now liest near<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That much-loved inland sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The ripples of whose blue waves cheer<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Vevey and Meillerie:<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And in that gracious region bland,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where with clear-rustling wave<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The scented pines of Switzerland<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stand dark round thy green grave,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Between the dusty vineyard-walls<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Issuing on that green place<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The early peasant still recalls<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The pensive stranger's face,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_332" id="Page_332">[332]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">And stoops to clear thy moss-grown date<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ere he plods on again;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or whether, by maligner fate,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Among the swarms of men,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Where between granite terraces<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The blue Seine rolls her wave,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Capital of Pleasure sees<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The hardly heard-of grave;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Farewell! Under the sky we part,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the stern Alpine dell.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O unstrung will! O broken heart!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A last, a last farewell!<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="OBERMANN_ONCE_MORE" id="OBERMANN_ONCE_MORE"></a>OBERMANN ONCE MORE</h2>

<h3>(COMPOSED MANY YEARS AFTER THE PRECEDING)</h3>

<h3><i>Savez-vous quelque bien qui console du regret d'un monde?</i></h3>

<p class="author"><span class="smcap"><b>Obermann</b></span>.</p>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Glion?&mdash;&mdash;Ah, twenty years, it cuts<a name="FNanchor_27_29" id="FNanchor_27_29"></a><a href="#Footnote_27_29" class="fnanchor">[27]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">All meaning from a name!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">White houses prank where once were huts.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Glion, but not the same!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And yet I know not! All unchanged<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The turf, the pines, the sky!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The hills in their old order ranged;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The lake, with Chillon by!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And, 'neath those chestnut-trees, where stiff<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And stony mounts the way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The crackling husk-heaps burn, as if<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I left them yesterday!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_333" id="Page_333">[333]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Across the valley, on that slope,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The huts of Avant shine!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its pines, under their branches, ope<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ways for the pasturing kine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Full-foaming milk-pails, Alpine fare,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sweet heaps of fresh-cut grass,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Invite to rest the traveller there<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Before he climb the pass&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The gentian-flower'd pass, its crown<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With yellow spires aflame;<a name="FNanchor_28_30" id="FNanchor_28_30"></a><a href="#Footnote_28_30" class="fnanchor">[28]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whence drops the path to Alli&egrave;re down,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And walls where Byron came,<a name="FNanchor_29_31" id="FNanchor_29_31"></a><a href="#Footnote_29_31" class="fnanchor">[29]</a><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">By their green river, who doth change<br /></span>
<span class="i2">His birth-name just below;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Orchard, and croft, and full-stored grange<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nursed by his pastoral flow.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But stop!&mdash;to fetch back thoughts that stray<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Beyond this gracious bound,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The cone of Jaman, pale and grey,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">See, in the blue profound!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Ah, Jaman! delicately tall<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Above his sun-warm'd firs&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What thoughts to me his rocks recall,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What memories he stirs!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And who but thou must be, in truth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Obermann! with me here?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou master of my wandering youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But left this many a year!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_334" id="Page_334">[334]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yes, I forget the world's work wrought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its warfare waged with pain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">An eremite with thee, in thought<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Once more I slip my chain,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And to thy mountain-chalet come,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And lie beside its door,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And hear the wild bee's Alpine hum,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And thy sad, tranquil lore!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Again I feel the words inspire<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Their mournful calm; serene,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet tinged with infinite desire<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For all that <i>might</i> have been&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">The harmony from which man swerved<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Made his life's rule once more!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The universal order served,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Earth happier than before!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">&mdash;While thus I mused, night gently ran<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down over hill and wood.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then, still and sudden, Obermann<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On the grass near me stood.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Those pensive features well I knew,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On my mind, years before,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Imaged so oft! imaged so true!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;A shepherd's garb he wore,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">A mountain-flower was in his hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A book was in his breast.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Bent on my face, with gaze which scann'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My soul, his eyes did rest.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_335" id="Page_335">[335]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"And is it thou," he cried, "so long<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Held by the world which we<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Loved not, who turnest from the throng<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Back to thy youth and me?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"And from thy world, with heart opprest,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Choosest thou <i>now</i> to turn?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah me! we anchorites read things best,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Clearest their course discern!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Thou fledst me when the ungenial earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man's work-place, lay in gloom.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Return'st thou in her hour of birth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of hopes and hearts in bloom?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Perceiv'st thou not the change of day?<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Ah! Carry back thy ken,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What, some two thousand years! Survey<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The world as it was then!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Like ours it look'd in outward air.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its head was clear and true,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sumptuous its clothing, rich its fare,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No pause its action knew;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Stout was its arm, each thew and bone<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Seem'd puissant and alive&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, ah! its heart, its heart was stone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And so it could not thrive!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"On that hard Pagan world disgust<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And secret loathing fell.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Deep weariness and sated lust<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Made human life a hell.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_336" id="Page_336">[336]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"In his cool hall, with haggard eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Roman noble lay;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He drove abroad, in furious guise,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Along the Appian way.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"He made a feast, drank fierce and fast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And crown'd his hair with flowers&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">No easier nor no quicker pass'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The impracticable hours.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"The brooding East with awe beheld<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Her impious younger world.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Roman tempest swell'd and swell'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And on her head was hurl'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"The East bow'd low before the blast<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In patient, deep disdain;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She let the legions thunder past,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And plunged in thought again.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"So well she mused, a morning broke<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Across her spirit grey;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A conquering, new-born joy awoke,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And fill'd her life with day.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'Poor world,' she cried, 'so deep accurst,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That runn'st from pole to pole<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To seek a draught to slake thy thirst&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Go, seek it in thy soul!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"She heard it, the victorious West,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In crown and sword array'd!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She felt the void which mined her breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She shiver'd and obey'd.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_337" id="Page_337">[337]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"She veil'd her eagles, snapp'd her sword,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And laid her sceptre down;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Her stately purple she abhorr'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And her imperial crown.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"She broke her flutes, she stopp'd her sports,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Her artists could not please;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She tore her books, she shut her courts,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She fled her palaces;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Lust of the eye and pride of life<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She left it all behind,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And hurried, torn with inward strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The wilderness to find.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Tears wash'd the trouble from her face!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">She changed into a child!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Mid weeds and wrecks she stood&mdash;a place<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of ruin&mdash;but she smiled!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Oh, had I lived in that great day,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">How had its glory new<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fill'd earth and heaven, and caught away<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My ravish'd spirit too!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"No thoughts that to the world belong<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Had stood against the wave<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of love which set so deep and strong<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From Christ's then open grave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"No cloister-floor of humid stone<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Had been too cold for me.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For me no Eastern desert lone<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Had been too far to flee.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_338" id="Page_338">[338]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"No lonely life had pass'd too slow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When I could hourly scan<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Upon his Cross, with head sunk low,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That nail'd, thorn-crowned Man!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Could see the Mother with her Child<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whose tender winning arts<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have to his little arms beguiled<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So many wounded hearts!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"And centuries came and ran their course,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And unspent all that time<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still, still went forth that Child's dear force,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And still was at its prime.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Ay, ages long endured his span<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of life&mdash;'tis true received&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That gracious Child, that thorn-crown'd Man!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;He lived while we believed.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"While we believed, on earth he went,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And open stood his grave.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Men call'd from chamber, church, and tent;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And Christ was by to save.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Now he is dead! Far hence he lies<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the lorn Syrian town;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And on his grave, with shining eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Syrian stars look down.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"In vain men still, with hoping new,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Regard his death-place dumb,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And say the stone is not yet to,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And wait for words to come.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_339" id="Page_339">[339]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Ah, o'er that silent sacred land,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of sun, and arid stone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And crumbling wall, and sultry sand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sounds now one word alone!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"<i>Unduped of fancy, henceforth man</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Must labour!&mdash;must resign</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>His all too human creeds, and scan</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Simply the way divine!</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"But slow that tide of common thought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which bathed our life, retired;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Slow, slow the old world wore to nought,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And pulse by pulse expired.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Its frame yet stood without a breach<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When blood and warmth were fled;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And still it spake its wonted speech&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But every word was dead.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"And oh, we cried, that on this corse<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Might fall a freshening storm!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rive its dry bones, and with new force<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A new-sprung world inform!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"&mdash;Down came the storm! O'er France it pass'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In sheets of scathing fire;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All Europe felt that fiery blast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And shook as it rush'd by her.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Down came the storm! In ruins fell<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The worn-out world we knew.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">It pass'd, that elemental swell!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Again appear'd the blue;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_340" id="Page_340">[340]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"The sun shone in the new-wash'd sky,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And what from heaven saw he?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Blocks of the past, like icebergs high,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Float on a rolling sea!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Upon them plies the race of man<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All it before endeavour'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Ye live,' I cried, 'ye work and plan,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And know not ye are sever'd!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'Poor fragments of a broken world<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whereon men pitch their tent!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Why were ye too to death not hurl'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When your world's day was spent?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'That glow of central fire is done<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which with its fusing flame<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Knit all your parts, and kept you one&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But ye, ye are the same!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'The past, its mask of union on,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Had ceased to live and thrive.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The past, its mask of union gone,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Say, is it more alive?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'Your creeds are dead, your rites are dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Your social order too!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Where tarries he, the Power who said:<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>See, I make all things new?</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'The millions suffer still, and grieve,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And what can helpers heal<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With old-world cures men half believe<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For woes they wholly feel?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_341" id="Page_341">[341]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'And yet men have such need of joy!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But joy whose grounds are true;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And joy that should all hearts employ<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As when the past was new.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'Ah, not the emotion of that past,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its common hope, were vain!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Some new such hope must dawn at last,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or man must toss in pain.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"'But now the old is out of date,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The new is not yet born,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And who can be <i>alone</i> elate,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While the world lies forlorn?'<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Then to the wilderness I fled.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There among Alpine snows<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And pastoral huts I hid my head,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And sought and found repose.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"It was not yet the appointed hour.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sad, patient, and resign'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I watch'd the crocus fade and flower,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I felt the sun and wind.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"The day I lived in was not mine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Man gets no second day.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In dreams I saw the future shine&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But ah! I could not stay!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Action I had not, followers, fame;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I pass'd obscure, alone.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The after-world forgets my name,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor do I wish it known.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_342" id="Page_342">[342]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Composed to bear, I lived and died,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And knew my life was vain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With fate I murmur not, nor chide,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">At S&egrave;vres by the Seine<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"(If Paris that brief flight allow)<br /></span>
<span class="i2">My humble tomb explore!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">It bears: <i>Eternity, be thou</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>My refuge!</i> and no more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"But thou, whom fellowship of mood<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Did make from haunts of strife<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Come to my mountain-solitude,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And learn my frustrate life;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"O thou, who, ere thy flying span<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Was past of cheerful youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Didst find the solitary man<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And love his cheerless truth&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Despair not thou as I despair'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nor be cold gloom thy prison!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Forward the gracious hours have fared,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And see! the sun is risen!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"He breaks the winter of the past;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A green, new earth appears.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Millions, whose life in ice lay fast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Have thoughts, and smiles, and tears.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"What though there still need effort, strife?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though much be still unwon?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet warm it mounts, the hour of life!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Death's frozen hour is done!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_343" id="Page_343">[343]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"The world's great order dawns in sheen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">After long darkness rude,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Divinelier imaged, clearer seen,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">With happier zeal pursued.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"With hope extinct and brow composed<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I mark'd the present die;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Its term of life was nearly closed,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet it had more than I.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"But thou, though to the world's new hour<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou come with aspect marr'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shorn of the joy, the bloom, the power<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which best befits its bard&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Though more than half thy years be past,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And spent thy youthful prime;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though, round thy firmer manhood cast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hang weeds of our sad time<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Whereof thy youth felt all the spell,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And traversed all the shade&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Though late, though dimm'd, though weak, yet tell<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hope to a world new-made!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Help it to fill that deep desire,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The want which rack'd our brain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Consumed our heart with thirst like fire,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Immedicable pain;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"Which to the wilderness drove out<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our life, to Alpine snow,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And palsied all our word with doubt,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And all our work with woe<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_344" id="Page_344">[344]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">"What still of strength is left, employ<br /></span>
<span class="i2">That end to help attain:<br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>One common wave of thought and joy</i><br /></span>
<span class="i2"><i>Lifting mankind again</i>!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">&mdash;The vision ended. I awoke<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As out of sleep, and no<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Voice moved;&mdash;only the torrent broke<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The silence, far below.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Soft darkness on the turf did lie.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Solemn, o'er hut and wood,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In the yet star-sown nightly sky,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The peak of Jaman stood.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Still in my soul the voice I heard<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Obermann!&mdash;--away<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I turned; by some vague impulse stirr'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Along the rocks of Naye<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Past Sonchaud's piny flanks I gaze<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And the blanch'd summit bare<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of Malatrait, to where in haze<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The Valais opens fair,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And the domed Velan, with his snows,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Behind the upcrowding hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Doth all the heavenly opening close<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which the Rhone's murmur fills;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And glorious there, without a sound,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Across the glimmering lake,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">High in the Valais-depth profound,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">I saw the morning break.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_345" id="Page_345">[345]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="DRAMATIC_POEMS" id="DRAMATIC_POEMS"></a>DRAMATIC POEMS</h2>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_346" id="Page_346">[346]</a></span></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_347" id="Page_347">[347]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="MEROPE" id="MEROPE"></a>MEROPE<br /><br />

A TRAGEDY</h2>

<h3>STORY OF THE DRAMA</h3>


<div class="blockquot"><p>Apollodorus says:&mdash;"Cresphontes had not reigned long in Messenia
when he was murdered, together with two of his sons. And Polyphontes
reigned in his stead, he, too, being of the family of Hercules; and he had
for his wife, against her will, Merope, the widow of the murdered king.
But Merope had borne to Cresphontes a third son, called &AElig;pytus; him
she gave to her own father to bring up. He, when he came to man's
estate, returned secretly to Messenia, and slew Polyphontes and the other
murderers of his father."</p>

<p>Hyginus says:&mdash;"Merope sent away and concealed her infant son.
Polyphontes sought for him everywhere in vain. He, when he grew up,
laid a plan to avenge the murder of his father and brothers. In pursuance
of this plan he came to king Polyphontes and reported the death of the son
of Cresphontes and Merope. The king ordered him to be hospitably entertained,
intending to inquire further of him. He, being very tired, went to
sleep, and an old man, who was the channel through whom the mother
and son used to communicate, arrives at this moment in tears, bringing
word to Merope that her son had disappeared from his protector's house,
and was slain. Merope, believing that the sleeping stranger is the
murderer of her son, comes into the guest-chamber with an axe, not
knowing that he whom she would slay was her son; the old man recognised
him, and withheld Merope from slaying him. The king, Polyphontes,
rejoicing at the supposed death of &AElig;pytus, celebrated a sacrifice; his guest,
pretending to strike the sacrificial victim, slew the king, and so got back
his father's kingdom."</p></div>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>The events on which the action of the drama turns belong to the period
of transition from the heroic and fabulous to the human and historic age of<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_348" id="Page_348">[348]</a></span>
Greece. The doings of the hero Hercules, the ancestor of the Messenian
&AElig;pytus, belong to fable; but the invasion of Peloponnesus by the Dorians
under chiefs claiming to be descended from Hercules, and their settlement
in Argos, Laced&aelig;mon, and Messenia, belong to history. &AElig;pytus is
descended on the father's side from Hercules, Perseus, and the kings of
Argos; on the mother's side from Pelasgus, and the aboriginal kings of
Arcadia. Callisto, the daughter of the wicked Lycaon, and the mother,
by Zeus, of Arcas, from whom the Arcadians took their name, was the
granddaughter of Pelasgus. The birth of Arcas brought upon Callisto the
anger of the virgin-goddess Artemis, whose service she followed: she was
changed into a she-bear, and in this form was chased by her own son,
grown to manhood. Zeus interposed, and the mother and son were
removed from the earth, and placed among the stars. Callisto became
the famous constellation of the Great Bear; her son became Arcturus,
Arctophylax, or Bo&ouml;tes. From this son of Callisto were descended Cypselus,
the maternal grandfather of &AElig;pytus, and the children of Cypselus, Laias
and Merope.</p>

<p>The story of the life of Hercules, the paternal ancestor of &AElig;pytus, is so
well known that there is no need to record it. The reader will remember
that, although entitled to the throne of Argos by right of descent from
Perseus and Danaus, and to the thrones of Sparta and Messenia by right
of conquest, Hercules yet passed his life in labours and wanderings, subjected
by the decree of fate to the commands of his kinsman, the feeble
and malignant Eurystheus. At his death he bequeathed to his offspring,
the Heracleid&aelig;, his own claims to the kingdoms of Peloponnesus, and to
the persecution of Eurystheus. They at first sought shelter with Ceyx,
king of Trachis; he was too weak to protect them, and they then took
refuge at Athens. The Athenians refused to deliver them up at the
demand of Eurystheus; he invaded Attica, and a battle was fought near
Marathon, in which, after Macaria, a daughter of Hercules, had devoted
herself for the preservation of her house, Eurystheus fell, and the Heracleid&aelig;
and their Athenian protectors were victorious. The memory of Macaria's
self-sacrifices was perpetuated by the name of a spring of water on the
plain of Marathon, the spring Macaria. The Heracleid&aelig; then endeavoured
to effect their return to Peloponnesus. Hyllus, the eldest of them,
inquired of the oracle at Delphi respecting their return; he was told to
return by the <i>narrow passage</i> and in the <i>third harvest</i>. Accordingly, in
the third year from that time Hyllus led an army to the Isthmus of Corinth;
but there he was encountered by an army of Achaians and Arcadians, and
fell in single combat with Echemus, king of Tegea. Upon this defeat the
Heracleid&aelig; retired to northern Greece; there, after much wandering, they
finally took refuge with &AElig;gimius, king of the Dorians, who appears to have<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_349" id="Page_349">[349]</a></span>
been the fastest friend of their house, and whose Dorian warriors formed the
army which at last achieved their return. But, for a hundred years from
the date of their first attempt, the Heracleid&aelig; were defeated in their successive
invasions of Peloponnesus. Cleolaus and Aristomachus, the son and
grandson of Hyllus, fell in unsuccessful expeditions. At length the sons
of Aristomachus, Temenus, Cresphontes, and Aristodemus, when grown up,
repaired to Delphi and taxed the oracle with the non-fulfilment of the
promise made to their ancestor Hyllus. But Apollo replied that his oracle
had been misunderstood; for that by the <i>third harvest</i> he had meant the
third generation, and by the <i>narrow passage</i> he had meant the straits of the
Corinthian Gulf. After this explanation the sons of Aristomachus built a
fleet at Naupactus; and finally, in the hundredth year from the death of
Hyllus and the eightieth from the fall of Troy, the invasion was again
attempted and was this time successful. The son of Orestes, Tisamenus,
who ruled both Argos and Laced&aelig;mon, fell in battle; many of his vanquished
subjects left their homes and took refuge in Achaia.</p>

<p>The spoil was now to be divided among the conquerors. Aristodemus,
the youngest of the sons of Aristomachus, did not survive to enjoy his share.
He was slain at Delphi by the sons of Pylades and Electra, the kinsman,
through their mother, of the house of Agamemnon, that house which the
Heracleid&aelig; with their Dorian army had dispossessed. The claims of
Aristodemus descended to his two sons, Procles and Eurysthenes, children
under the guardianship of their maternal uncle, Theras. Temenus, the
eldest of the sons of Aristomachus, took the kingdom of Argos. For the
two remaining kingdoms, that of Sparta and that of Messenia, his two
nephews, who were to rule jointly, and their uncle Cresphontes, had to
cast lots. Cresphontes wished to have the fertile Messenia, and induced
his brother to acquiesce in a trick which secured it to him. The lot of
Cresphontes and that of his two nephews were to be placed in a water-jar,
and thrown out. Messenia was to belong to him whose lot came out first.
With the connivance of Temenus, Cresphontes marked as his own lot a
pellet composed of baked clay, as the lot of his nephews, a pellet of
unbaked clay; the unbaked pellet was of course dissolved in the water,
while the brick pellet fell out alone. Messenia, therefore, was assigned to
Cresphontes.</p>

<p>Messenia was at this time ruled by Melanthus, a descendant of Neleus.
This ancestor, a prince of the great house of &AElig;olus, had come from
Thessaly and succeeded to the Messenian throne on the failure of the
previous dynasty. Melanthus and his race were thus foreigners in Messenia
and were unpopular. His subjects offered little or no opposition to the
invading Dorians; Melanthus abandoned his kingdom to Cresphontes, and
retired to Athens.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_350" id="Page_350">[350]</a></span></p>

<p>Cresphontes married Merope, whose native country, Arcadia, was not
affected by the Dorian invasion. This marriage, the issue of which was
three sons, connected him with the native population of Peloponnesus. He
built a new capital of Messenia, Stenyclaros, and transferred thither, from
Pylos, the seat of government; he proposed, moreover, says Pausanias, to
divide Messenia into five states, and to confer on the native Messenians
equal privileges with their Dorian conquerors. The Dorians complained
that his administration unduly favoured the vanquished people; his chief
magnates, headed by Polyphontes, himself a descendant of Hercules,
formed a cabal against him, and he was slain with his two eldest sons.
The youngest son of Cresphontes, &AElig;pytus, then an infant, was saved by his
mother, who sent him to her father, Cypselus, the king of Arcadia, under
whose protection he was brought up.</p>

<p>The drama begins at the moment when &AElig;pytus, grown to manhood,
returns secretly to Messenia to take vengeance on his father's murderers.
At this period Temenus was no longer reigning at Argos; he had been
murdered by his sons, jealous of their brother-in-law, Deiphontes. The
sons of Aristodemus, Procles and Eurysthenes, at variance with their uncle
and ex-guardian, Theras, were reigning at Sparta.</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<h3>PERSONS OF THE DRAMA</h3>


<div class="chlist"><span class="smcap">Laias</span>, <i>uncle of</i> <span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span>, <i>brother of</i> <span class="smcap">Merope</span>.<br />
<span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span>, <i>son of</i> <span class="smcap">Merope</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Cresphontes</span>.<br />
<span class="smcap">Polyphontes</span>, <i>king of</i> <span class="smcap">Messenia</span>.<br />
<span class="smcap">Merope</span>, <i>widow of</i> <span class="smcap">Cresphontes</span>, <i>the murdered king of</i> <span class="smcap">Messenia</span>.<br />
<span class="smcap">The Chorus</span>, <i>of</i> <span class="smcap">Messenian</span> <i>maidens</i>.<br />
<span class="smcap">Arcas</span>, <i>an old man of</i> <span class="smcap">Merope's</span> <i>household</i>.<br />
<span class="smcap">Messenger</span>.<br />
<span class="smcap">Guards, Attendants</span>, etc.</div>

<p><i>The Scene is before the royal palace in</i> <span class="smcap">Stenyclaros</span>, <i>the capital of</i>
<span class="smcap">Messenia</span>. <i>In the foreground is the tomb of</i> <span class="smcap">Cresphontes</span>. <i>The
action commences at day-break.</i></p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_351" id="Page_351">[351]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2>MEROPE</h2>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6"><span class="smcap">LAIAS.     &AElig;PYTUS.</span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Laias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Son of Cresphontes, we have reach'd the goal<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of our night-journey, and thou see'st thy home.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behold thy heritage, thy father's realm!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This is that fruitful, famed Messenian land,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wealthy in corn and flocks, which, when at last<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The late-relenting Gods with victory brought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Heracleid&aelig; back to Pelops' isle,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fell to thy father's lot, the second prize.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before thy feet this recent city spreads<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Stenyclaros, which he built, and made<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of his fresh-conquer'd realm the royal seat,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Degrading Pylos from its ancient rule.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There stands the temple of thine ancestor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Great Heracles; and, in that public place,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Zeus hath his altar, where thy father fell.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Southward and west, behold those snowy peaks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Taygetus, Laconia's border-wall;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, on this side, those confluent streams which make<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pamisus watering the Messenian plain;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then to the north, Lyc&aelig;us and the hills<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_352" id="Page_352">[352]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of pastoral Arcadia, where, a babe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Snatch'd from the slaughter of thy father's house,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy mother's kin received thee, and rear'd up.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our journey is well made, the work remains<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which to perform we made it; means for that<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let us consult, before this palace sends<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Its inmates on their daily tasks abroad.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Haste and advise, for day comes on apace.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O brother of my mother, guardian true,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And second father from that hour when first<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My mother's faithful servant laid me down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An infant, at the hearth of Cypselus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My grandfather, the good Arcadian king&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy part it were to advise, and mine to obey.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But let us keep that purpose, which, at home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We judged the best; chance finds no better way.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Go thou into the city, and seek out<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whate'er in the Messenian people stirs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of faithful fondness for their former king<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or hatred to their present; in this last<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will lie, my grandsire said, our fairest chance.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For tyrants make man good beyond himself;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hate to their rule, which else would die away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their daily-practised chafings keep alive.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seek this! revive, unite it, give it hope;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bid it rise boldly at the signal given.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Meanwhile within my father's palace I,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An unknown guest, will enter, bringing word<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of my own death&mdash;but, Laias, well I hope<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through that pretended death to live and reign.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i14">[<span class="smcap">The Chorus</span> <i>comes forth</i>.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_353" id="Page_353">[353]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Softly, stand back!&mdash;see, to these palace gates<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What black procession slowly makes approach?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sad-chanting maidens clad in mourning robes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With pitchers in their hands, and fresh-pull'd flowers&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Doubtless, they bear them to my father's tomb.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i14">[<span class="smcap">Merope</span> <i>comes forth</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And look, to meet them, that one, grief-plunged Form,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Severer, paler, statelier than they all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A golden circlet on her queenly brow!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Laias, Laias, let the heart speak here&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall I not greet her? shall I not leap forth?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">[<span class="smcap">Polyphontes</span> <i>comes forth, following</i> <span class="smcap">Merope</span>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Laias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not so! thy heart would pay its moment's speech<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By silence ever after, for, behold!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The King (I know him, even through many years)<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Follows the approaching Queen, who stops, as call'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No lingering now! straight to the city I;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do thou, till for thine entrance to this house<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The happy moment comes, lurk here unseen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behind the shelter of thy father's tomb;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Remove yet further off, if aught comes near.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, here while harbouring, on its margin lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sole offering that thou hast, locks from thy head;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fill thy leisure with an earnest prayer<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To his avenging Shade, and to the Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who under earth watch guilty deeds of men,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To guide our vengeance to a prosperous close.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">[<span class="smcap">Laias</span> <i>goes out</i>. <span class="smcap">Polyphontes</span>, <span class="smcap">Merope</span>,
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">The Chorus</span>
<i>come forward. As they advance</i>, <span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span>,
<i>who at first conceals himself behind the tomb,</i>
<i>moves off the stage</i>.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_354" id="Page_354">[354]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4"><i>Polyphontes</i> (<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">The Chorus</span>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Set down your pitchers, maidens, and fall back!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Suspend your melancholy rites awhile;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shortly ye shall resume them with your Queen.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6">(<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Merope</span>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I sought thee, Merope; I find thee thus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As I have ever found thee; bent to keep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By sad observances and public grief,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A mournful feud alive, which else would die.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I blame thee not, I do thy heart no wrong!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy deep seclusion, thine unyielding gloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thine attitude of cold, estranged reproach,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These punctual funeral honours, year by year<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Repeated, are in thee, I well believe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Courageous, faithful actions, nobly dared.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, Merope, the eyes of other men<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Read in these actions, innocent in thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Perpetual promptings to rebellious hope,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">War-cries to faction, year by year renew'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beacons of vengeance, not to be let die.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And me, believe it, wise men gravely blame,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And ignorant men despise me, that I stand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Passive, permitting thee what course thou wilt.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yes, the crowd mutters that remorseful fear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And paralysing conscience stop my arm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When it should pluck thee from thy hostile way.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All this I bear, for, what I seek, I know:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Peace, peace is what I seek, and public calm;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Endless extinction of unhappy hates,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Union cemented for this nation's weal.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And even now, if to behold me here,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_355" id="Page_355">[355]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">This day, amid these rites, this black-robed train,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wakens, O Queen! remembrance in thy heart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Too wide at variance with the peace I seek&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I will not violate thy noble grief,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The prayer I came to urge I will defer.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">This day, to-morrow, yesterday, alike<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I am, I shall be, have been, in my mind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tow'rd thee; toward thy silence as thy speech.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Speak, therefore, or keep silence, which thou wilt.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hear me, then, speak; and let this mournful day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The twentieth anniversary of strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Henceforth be honour'd as the date of peace.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yes, twenty years ago this day beheld<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The king Cresphontes, thy great husband, fall;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It needs no yearly offerings at his tomb<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To keep alive that memory in my heart&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It lives, and, while I see the light, will live.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For we were kinsmen&mdash;more than kinsmen&mdash;friends;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Together we had grown, together lived;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Together to this isle of Pelops came<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To take the inheritance of Heracles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Together won this fair Messenian land&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alas, that, how to rule it, was our broil!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He had his counsel, party, friends&mdash;I mine;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He stood by what he wish'd for&mdash;I the same;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I smote him, when our wishes clash'd in arms&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He had smit me, had he been swift as I.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But while I smote him, Queen, I honour'd him;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_356" id="Page_356">[356]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Me, too, had he prevail'd, he had not scorn'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Enough of this! Since that, I have maintain'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sceptre&mdash;not remissly let it fall&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I am seated on a prosperous throne;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet still, for I conceal it not, ferments<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the Messenian people what remains<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of thy dead husband's faction&mdash;vigorous once,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now crush'd but not quite lifeless by his fall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And these men look to thee, and from thy grief&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Something too studiously, forgive me, shown&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Infer thee their accomplice; and they say<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That thou in secret nurturest up thy son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Him whom thou hiddest when thy husband fell,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To avenge that fall, and bring them back to power.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Such are their hopes&mdash;I ask not if by thee<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Willingly fed or no&mdash;their most vain hopes;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For I have kept conspiracy fast-chain'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till now, and I have strength to chain it still.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, Merope, the years advance;&mdash;I stand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the threshold of old age, alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Always in arms, always in face of foes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The long repressive attitude of rule<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Leaves me austerer, sterner, than I would;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Old age is more suspicious than the free<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And valiant heart of youth, or manhood's firm<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unclouded reason; I would not decline<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into a jealous tyrant, scourged with fears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Closing in blood and gloom his sullen reign.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The cares which might in me with time, I feel,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beget a cruel temper, help me quell!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The breach between our parties help me close!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Assist me to rule mildly; let us join<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our hands in solemn union, making friends<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_357" id="Page_357">[357]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our factions with the friendship of their chiefs.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let us in marriage, King and Queen, unite<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Claims ever hostile else, and set thy son&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No more an exile fed on empty hopes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to an unsubstantial title heir,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But prince adopted by the will of power,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And future king&mdash;before this people's eyes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Consider him! consider not old hates!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Consider, too, this people, who were dear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To their dead king, thy husband&mdash;yea, too dear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For that destroy'd him. Give them peace! thou can'st.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Merope, how many noble thoughts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How many precious feelings of man's heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How many loves, how many gratitudes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do twenty years wear out, and see expire!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall they not wear one hatred out as well?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou hast forgot, then, who I am who hear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And who thou art who speakest to me? I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Am Merope, thy murder'd master's wife;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou art Polyphontes, first his friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then ... his murderer. These offending tears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That murder moves; this breach that thou would'st close<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was by that murder open'd; that one child<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(If still, indeed, he lives) whom thou would'st seat<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon a throne not thine to give, is heir,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because thou slew'st his brothers with their father.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who can patch union here? What can there be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But everlasting horror 'twixt us two,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gulfs of estranging blood? Across that chasm<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who can extend their hands?... Maidens, take back<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These offerings home! our rites are spoil'd to-day.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_358" id="Page_358">[358]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not so; let these Messenian maidens mark<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fear'd and blacken'd ruler of their race,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Albeit with lips unapt to self-excuse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blow off the spot of murder from his name.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Murder!&mdash;but what <i>is</i> murder? When a wretch<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For private gain or hatred takes a life,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We call it murder, crush him, brand his name.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when, for some great public cause, an arm<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is, without love or hate, austerely raised<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against a power exempt from common checks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dangerous to all, to be but thus annull'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ranks any man with murder such an act?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With grievous deeds, perhaps; with murder, no!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Find then such cause, the charge of murder falls&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be judge thyself if it abound not here.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All know how weak the eagle, Heracles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soaring from his death-pile on &OElig;ta, left<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His puny, callow eaglets; and what trials&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Infirm protectors, dubious oracles<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Construed awry, misplann'd invasions&mdash;wore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Three generations of his offspring out;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hardly the fourth, with grievous loss, regain'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their fathers' realm, this isle, from Pelops named.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who made that triumph, though deferr'd, secure?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who, but the kinsmen of the royal brood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Heracles, scarce Heracleid&aelig; less<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than they? these, and the Dorian lords, whose king<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&AElig;gimius gave our outcast house a home<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When Thebes, when Athens dared not; who in arms<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thrice issued with us from their pastoral vales,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And shed their blood like water in our cause?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_359" id="Page_359">[359]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Such were the dispossessors; of what stamp<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were they we dispossessed?&mdash;of us I speak,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who to Messenia with thy husband came;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I speak not now of Argos, where his brother,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not now of Sparta, where his nephews reign'd.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What we found here were tribes of fame obscure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Much turbulence, and little constancy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Precariously ruled by foreign lords<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the &AElig;olian stock of Neleus sprung,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A house once great, now dwindling in its sons.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Such were the conquer'd, such the conquerors; who<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had most thy husband's confidence? Consult<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His acts! the wife he chose was&mdash;full of virtues&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But an Arcadian princess, more akin<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To his new subjects than to us; his friends<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were the Messenian chiefs; the laws he framed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were aim'd at their promotion, our decline.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, finally, this land, then half-subdued,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which from one central city's guarded seat<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As from a fastness in the rocks our scant<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Handful of Dorian conquerors might have curb'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He parcell'd out in five confederate states,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sowing his victors thinly through them all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mere prisoners, meant or not, among our foes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If this was fear of them, it shamed the king;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If jealousy of us, it shamed the man.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Long we refrain'd ourselves, submitted long,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Construed his acts indulgently, revered,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though found perverse, the blood of Heracles;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Reluctantly the rest&mdash;but, against all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One voice preach'd patience, and that voice was mine!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At last it reach'd us, that he, still mistrustful,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Deeming, as tyrants deem, our silence hate,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_360" id="Page_360">[360]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unadulating grief conspiracy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had to this city, Stenyclaros, call'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A general assemblage of the realm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With compact in that concourse to deliver,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For death, his ancient to his new-made friends.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Patience was thenceforth self destruction. I,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I his chief kinsman, I his pioneer<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And champion to the throne, I honouring most<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of men the line of Heracles, preferr'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The many of that lineage to the one;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What his foes dared not, I, his lover, dared;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I at that altar, where mid shouting crowds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He sacrificed, our ruin in his heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Zeus, before he struck his blow, struck mine&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Struck once, and awed his mob, and saved this realm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Murder let others call this, if they will;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I, self-defence and righteous execution.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Alas, how fair a colour can his tongue,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who self-exculpates, lend to foulest deeds!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy trusting lord didst thou, his servant, slay;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Kinsman, thou slew'st thy kinsman; friend, thy friend&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This were enough; but let me tell thee, too,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou hadst no cause, as feign'd, in his misrule.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For ask at Argos, asked in Laced&aelig;mon,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose people, when the Heracleid&aelig; came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were hunted out, and to Achaia fled,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whether is better, to abide alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A wolfish band, in a dispeopled realm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or conquerors with conquer'd to unite<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into one puissant folk, as he design'd?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These sturdy and unworn Messenian tribes,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_361" id="Page_361">[361]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who shook the fierce Neleid&aelig; on their throne,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who to the invading Dorians stretch'd a hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And half bestow'd, half yielded up their soil&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He would not let his savage chiefs alight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A cloud of vultures, on this vigorous race,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ravin a little while in spoil and blood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, gorged and helpless, be assail'd and slain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He would have saved you from your furious selves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not in abhorr'd estrangement let you stand;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He would have mix'd you with your friendly foes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Foes dazzled with your prowess, well inclined<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To reverence your lineage, more, to obey;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So would have built you, in a few short years,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A just, therefore a safe, supremacy.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For well he knew, what you, his chiefs, did not&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How of all human rules the over-tense<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are apt to snap; the easy-stretch'd endure.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O gentle wisdom, little understood!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O arts above the vulgar tyrant's reach!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O policy too subtle far for sense<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of heady, masterful, injurious men!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This good he meant you, and for this he died!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet not for this&mdash;else might thy crime in part<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be error deem'd&mdash;but that pretence is vain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For, if ye slew him for supposed misrule,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Injustice to his kin and Dorian friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why with the offending father did ye slay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Two unoffending babes, his innocent sons?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why not on them have placed the forfeit crown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ruled in their name, and train'd them to your will?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had <i>they</i> misruled? had <i>they</i> forgot their friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forsworn their blood? ungratefully had <i>they</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Preferr'd Messenian serfs to Dorian lords?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_362" id="Page_362">[362]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">No! but to thy ambition their poor lives<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were bar&mdash;and this, too, was their father's crime.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That thou might'st reign he died, not for his fault<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even fancied; and his death thou wroughtest chief!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For, if the other lords desired his fall<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hotlier than thou, and were by thee kept back,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why dost thou only profit by his death?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy crown condemns thee, while thy tongue absolves.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now to me thou tenderest friendly league,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to my son reversion to thy throne!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Short answer is sufficient; league with thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For me I deem such impious; and for him<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Exile abroad more safe than heirship here.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I ask thee not to approve thy husband's death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No, nor expect thee to admit the grounds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In reason good, which justified my deed.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With women the heart argues, not the mind.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, for thy children's death, I stand assoil'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I saved them, meant them honour; but thy friends<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rose, and with fire and sword assailed my house<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By night; in that blind tumult they were slain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To chance impute their deaths, then, not to me.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Such chance as kill'd the father, kill'd the sons.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">One son at least I spared, for still he lives.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Tyrants think him they murder not they spare.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_363" id="Page_363">[363]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not much a tyrant thy free speech displays me.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thy shame secures my freedom, not thy will.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Shame rarely checks the genuine tyrant's will.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">One merit, then, thou hast; exult in that.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou standest out, I see, repellest peace.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thy sword repell'd it long ago, not I.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Doubtless thou reckonest on the help of friends.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not help of men, although, perhaps, of Gods.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What Gods? the Gods of concord, civil weal?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No! the avenging Gods, who punish crime.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_364" id="Page_364">[364]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Beware! from thee upbraidings I receive<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With pity, nay, with reverence; yet, beware!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know, I know how hard it is to think<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That right, that conscience pointed to a deed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where interest seems to have enjoin'd it too.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Most men are led by interest; and the few<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who are not, expiate the general sin,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Involved in one suspicion with the base.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dizzy the path and perilous the way<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which in a deed like mine a just man treads,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But it is sometimes trodden, oh! believe it.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet how <i>canst</i> thou believe it? therefore thou<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hast all impunity. Yet, lest thy friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Embolden'd by my lenience, think it fear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And count on like impunity, and rise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And have to thank thee for a fall, beware!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To rule this kingdom I intend; with sway<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clement, if may be, but to rule it&mdash;there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Expect no wavering, no retreat, no change.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now I leave thee to these rites, esteem'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pious, but impious, surely, if their scope<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be to foment old memories of wrath.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pray, as thou pour'st libations on this tomb,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To be deliver'd from thy foster'd hate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unjust suspicion, and erroneous fear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6">[<span class="smcap">Polyphontes</span> <i>goes into the palace.</i> <span class="smcap">The Chorus</span><br /></span>
<span class="i8"><i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Merope</span> <i>approach the tomb with their</i><br /></span>
<span class="i8"><i>offerings.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>strophe.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Draw, draw near to the tomb!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lay honey-cakes on its marge,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_365" id="Page_365">[365]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pour the libation of milk,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Deck it with garlands of flowers.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tears fall thickly the while!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behold, O King from the dark<br /></span>
<span class="i0">House of the grave, what we do!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>antistrophe.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Arcadian hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Send us the Youth whom ye hide,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Girt with his coat for the chase,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With the low broad hat of the tann'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hunter o'ershadowing his brow;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Grasping firm, in his hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Advanced, two javelins, not now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dangerous alone to the deer!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 1<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What shall I bear, O lost<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Husband and King, to thy grave?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pure libations, and fresh<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flowers? But thou, in the gloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Discontented, perhaps,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Demandest vengeance, not grief?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sternly requirest a man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Light to spring up to thy house?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vengeance, O Queen, is his due,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His most just prayer; yet his house&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If that might soothe him below&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prosperous, mighty, came back<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the third generation, the way<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Order'd by Fate, to their home;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_366" id="Page_366">[366]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now, glorious, secure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fill the wealth-giving thrones<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of their heritage, Pelops' isle.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 1.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Suffering sent them, Death<br /></span>
<span class="i0">March'd with them, Hatred and Strife<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Met them entering their halls.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For from the day when the first<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Heracleid&aelig; received<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That Delphic hest to return,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What hath involved them, but blind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Error on error, and blood?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Truly I hear of a Maid<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of that stock born, who bestow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her blood that so she might make<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Victory sure to her race,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the fight hung in doubt! but she now,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Honour'd and sung of by all,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far on Marathon plain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gives her name to the spring<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Macaria, blessed Child.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 3.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She led the way of death.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the plain of Tegea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the grave of Orestes&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where, in secret seclusion<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of his unreveal'd tomb,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sleeps Agamemnon's unhappy,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_367" id="Page_367">[367]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Matricidal, world-famed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seven-cubit-statured son&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sent forth Echemus, the victor, the king,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By whose hand, at the Isthmus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At the fate-denied straits,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fell the eldest of the sons of Heracles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hyllus, the chief of his house.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Brother follow'd sister<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The all-wept way.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes; but his seed still, wiser-counsell'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sail'd by the fate-meant Gulf to their conquest&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Slew their enemies' king, Tisamenus.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wherefore accept that happier omen!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet shall restorer appear to the race.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 3.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Three brothers won the field,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to two did Destiny<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Give the thrones that they conquer'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the third, what delays him<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From his unattain'd crown?...<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah Pylades and Electra,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ever faithful, untired,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Jealous, blood-exacting friends!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Your sons leap upon the foe of your kin,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the passes of Delphi,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the temple-built gorge!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There the youngest of the band of conquerors<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Perish'd, in sight of the goal.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thrice son follow'd sire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The all-wept way.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_368" id="Page_368">[368]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 4.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou tellest the fate of the last<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the three Heracleid&aelig;.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not of him, of Cresphontes thou shared'st the lot!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A king, a king was he while he lived,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swaying the sceptre with predestined hand;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now, minister loved,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Holds rule.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i7">Ah me ... Ah....<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">For the awful Monarchs below.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 5.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou touchest the worst of my ills.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oh had he fallen of old<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At the Isthmus, in fight with his foes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By Achaian, Arcadian spear!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then had his sepulchre risen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the high sea-bank, in the sight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of either Gulf, and remain'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All-regarded afar,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Noble memorial of worth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of a valiant Chief, to his own.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 4.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There rose up a cry in the streets<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the terrified people.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the altar of Zeus, from the crowd, came a wail.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_369" id="Page_369">[369]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">A blow, a blow was struck, and he fell,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sullying his garment with dark-streaming blood;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While stood o'er him a Form&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some Form<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i5">Ah me.... Ah....<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Of a dreadful Presence of fear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 5.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More piercing the second cry rang, <br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wail'd from the palace within,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the Children.... The Fury to them,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fresh from their father, draws near.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah bloody axe! dizzy blows!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In these ears, they thunder, they ring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These poor ears, still! and these eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Night and day see them fall,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fiery phantoms of death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the fair, curl'd heads of my sons.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 6.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not to thee only hath come <br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sorrow, O Queen, of mankind.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had not Electra to haunt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A palace defiled by a death unavenged,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For years, in silence, devouring her heart?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But her nursling, her hope, came at last.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou, too, rearest in hope,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far 'mid Arcadian hills,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_370" id="Page_370">[370]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Somewhere, for vengeance, a champion, a light.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soon, soon shall Zeus bring him home!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soon shall he dawn on this land!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 7.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Him in secret, in tears, <br /></span>
<span class="i0">Month after month, I await<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vainly. For he, in the glens<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Lyc&aelig;us afar,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A gladsome hunter of deer,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Basks in his morning of youth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Spares not a thought to his home.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 6.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Give not thy heart to despair. <br /></span>
<span class="i0">No lamentation can loose<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Prisoners of death from the grave;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Zeus, who accounteth thy quarrel his own,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still rules, still watches, and numb'reth the hours<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till the sinner, the vengeance, be ripe.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still, by Acheron stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Terrible Deities throned<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sit, and eye grimly the victim unscourged.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still, still the Dorian boy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Exiled, remembers his home.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 7.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Him if high-ruling Zeus <br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bring to me safe, let the rest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Go as it will! But if this<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clash with justice, the Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forgive my folly, and work<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_371" id="Page_371">[371]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vengeance on sinner and sin&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Only to me give my child!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 8.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hear us and help us, Shade of our King! <br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 9.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A return, O Father! give to thy boy! <br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 8.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Send an avenger, Gods of the dead! <br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 9.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An avenger I ask not&mdash;send me my son! <br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O Queen, for an avenger to appear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thinking that so I pray'd aright, I pray'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If I pray'd wrongly, I revoke the prayer.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Forgive me, maidens, if I seem too slack<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In calling vengeance on a murderer's head.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Impious I deem the alliance which he asks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Requite him words severe for seeming kind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And righteous, if he falls, I count his fall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With this, to those unbribed inquisitors<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who in man's inmost bosom sit and judge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The true avengers these, I leave his deed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By him shown fair, but, I believe, most foul.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If these condemn him, let them pass his doom!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_372" id="Page_372">[372]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">That doom obtain effect, from Gods or men!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So be it; yet will that more solace bring<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the chafed heart of Justice than to mine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To hear another tumult in these streets,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To have another murder in these halls,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To see another mighty victim bleed&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Small comfort offers for a woman there!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A woman, O my friends, has one desire:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To see secure, to live with, those she loves.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Can vengeance give me back the murdered? no!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Can it bring home my child? Ah, if it can,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I pray the Furies' ever-restless band,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And pray the Gods, and pray the all-seeing sun:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Sun, who careerest through the height of Heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When o'er the Arcadian forests thou art come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And see'st my stripling hunter there afield,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Put tightness in thy gold-embossed rein,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And check thy fiery steeds, and, leaning back,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Throw him a pealing word of summons down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To come, a late avenger, to the aid<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of this poor soul who bare him, and his sire."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If this will bring him back, be this my prayer!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But Vengeance travels in a dangerous way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Double of issue, full of pits and snares<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For all who pass, pursuers and pursued&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That way is dubious for a mother's prayer.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rather on thee I call, Husband beloved&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May Hermes, herald of the dead, convey<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My words below to thee, and make thee hear&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bring back our son! if may be, without blood!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Install him in thy throne, still without blood!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Grant him to reign there wise and just like thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More fortunate than thee, more fairly judged!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_373" id="Page_373">[373]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">This for our son; and for myself I pray,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soon, having once beheld him, to descend<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the quiet gloom, where thou art now.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These words to thine indulgent ear, thy wife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I send, and these libations pour the while.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6">[<i>They make their offerings at the tomb.</i> <span class="smcap">Merope</span><br /></span>
<span class="i8"><i>then turns to go towards the palace.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The dead hath now his offerings duly paid.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But whither go'st thou hence, O Queen, away?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">To receive Arcas, who to-day should come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bringing me of my boy the annual news.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No certain news if like the rest it run.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Certain in this, that 'tis uncertain still.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What keeps him in Arcadia from return?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">His grandsire and his uncles fear the risk.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Of what? it lies with them to make risk none.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_374" id="Page_374">[374]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Discovery of a visit made by stealth.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">With arms then they should send him, not by stealth.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">With arms they dare not, and by stealth they fear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I doubt their caution little suits their ward.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The heart of youth I know; that most I fear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I augur thou wilt hear some bold resolve.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I dare not wish it; but, at least, to hear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That my son still survives, in health, in bloom;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To hear that still he loves, still longs for, me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet, with a light uncareworn spirit, turns<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Quick from distressful thought, and floats in joy&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thus much from Arcas, my old servant true,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who saved him from these murderous halls a babe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And since has fondly watch'd him night and day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Save for this annual charge, I hope to hear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If this be all, I know not; but I know,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These many years I live for this alone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">[<span class="smcap">Merope</span> <i>goes in</i>.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_375" id="Page_375">[375]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 1.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Much is there which the sea <br /></span>
<span class="i0">Conceals from man, who cannot plumb its depths.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Air to his unwing'd form denies a way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And keeps its liquid solitudes unscaled.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even earth, whereon he treads,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So feeble is his march, so slow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Holds countless tracts untrod.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 1.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But more than all unplumb'd, <br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unscaled, untrodden, is the heart of man.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More than all secrets hid, the way it keeps.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor any of our organs so obtuse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Inaccurate, and frail,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As those wherewith we try to test<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Feelings and motives there.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yea, and not only have we not explored<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That wide and various world, the heart of others,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But even our own heart, that narrow world<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bounded in our own breast, we hardly know,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of our own actions dimly trace the causes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whether a natural obscureness, hiding<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That region in perpetual cloud,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or our own want of effort, be the bar.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Therefore&mdash;while acts are from their motives judged,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to one act many most unlike motives,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This pure, that guilty, may have each impell'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Power fails us to try clearly if that cause<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Assign'd us by the actor be the true one;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Power fails the man himself to fix distinctly<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_376" id="Page_376">[376]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The cause which drew him to his deed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And stamp himself, thereafter, bad or good.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 3.<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The most are bad</i>, wise men have said<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Let the best rule</i>, they say again.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The best, then, to dominion hath the right.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rights unconceded and denied,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Surely, if rights, may be by force asserted&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May be, nay should, if for the general weal.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The best, then, to the throne may carve his way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And strike opposers down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Free from all guilt of lawlessness,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or selfish lust of personal power;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bent only to serve virtue,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bent to diminish wrong.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 3.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And truly, in this ill-ruled world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Well sometimes may the good desire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To give to virtue her dominion due!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Well may he long to interrupt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The reign of folly, usurpation ever,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though fenced by sanction of a thousand years!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Well thirst to drag the wrongful ruler down;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Well purpose to pen back<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the narrow path of right<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The ignorant, headlong multitude,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who blindly follow, ever,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blind leaders, to their bane!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 4.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But who can say, without a fear:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>That best, who ought to rule, am I;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The mob, who ought to obey, are these;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>I the one righteous, they the many bad?</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who, without check of conscience, can aver<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_377" id="Page_377">[377]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">That he to power makes way by arms,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sheds blood, imprisons, banishes, attaints,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Commits all deeds the guilty oftenest do,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Without a single guilty thought,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Arm'd for right only, and the general good?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 4.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Therefore, with censure unallay'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Therefore, with unexcepting ban,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Zeus and pure-thoughted Justice brand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Imperious self-asserting violence;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sternly condemn the too bold man, who dares<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Elect himself Heaven's destined arm;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, knowing well man's inmost heart infirm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">However noble the committer be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His grounds however specious shown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Turn with averted eyes from deeds of blood.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>epode.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thus, though a woman, I was school'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By those whom I revere.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whether I learnt their lessons well,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or, having learnt them, well apply<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To what hath in this house befall'n,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If in the event be any proof,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The event will quickly show.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">[<span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span> <i>comes in</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Maidens, assure me if they told me true<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who told me that the royal house was here.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Rightly they told thee, and thou art arrived.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_378" id="Page_378">[378]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Here, then, it is, where Polyphontes dwells?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He doth; thou hast both house and master right.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Might some one straight inform him he is sought?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Inform him that thyself, for here he comes.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">[<span class="smcap">Polyphontes</span> <i>comes forth, with</i> <span class="smcap">Attendants</span><br /></span>
<span class="i10"><i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Guards</span>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O King, all hail! I come with weighty news;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Most likely, grateful; but, in all case, sure.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Speak them, that I may judge their kind myself.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Accept them in one word, for good or bad:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&AElig;pytus, the Messenian prince, is dead!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Dead!&mdash;and when died he? where? and by what hand?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And who art thou, who bringest me such news?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_379" id="Page_379">[379]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He perish'd in Arcadia, where he dwelt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With Cypselus; and two days since he died.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One of the train of Cypselus am I.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Instruct me of the manner of his death.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That will I do, and to this end I came.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For, being of like age, of birth not mean,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The son of an Arcadian noble, I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was chosen his companion from a boy;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the hunting-rambles which his heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unquiet, drove him ever to pursue<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through all the lordships of the Arcadian dales,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From chief to chief, I wander'd at his side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The captain of his squires, and his guard.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On such a hunting-journey, three morns since,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With beaters, hounds, and huntsmen, he and I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Set forth from Tegea, the royal town.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The prince at start seem'd sad, but his regard<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clear'd with blithe travel and the morning air.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We rode from Tegea, through the woods of oaks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Past Arn&ecirc; spring, where Rhea gave the babe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Poseidon to the shepherd-boys to hide<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From Saturn's search among the new-yean'd lambs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Mantineia, with its unbaked walls;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thence, by the Sea-God's Sanctuary and the tomb<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whither from wintry M&aelig;nalus were brought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The bones of Arcas, whence our race is named,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_380" id="Page_380">[380]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">On, to the marshy Orchomenian plain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the Stone Coffins;&mdash;then, by Caphy&aelig; Cliffs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Pheneos with its craggy citadel.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There, with the chief of that hill-town, we lodged<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One night; and the next day at dawn fared on<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the Three Fountains and the Adder's Hill<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the Stymphalian Lake, our journey's end,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To draw the coverts on Cyllen&ecirc;'s side.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There, on a high green spur which bathes its point<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far in the liquid lake, we sate, and drew<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cates from our hunters' pouch, Arcadian fare,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sweet chestnuts, barley-cakes, and boar's-flesh dried;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as we ate, and rested there, we talk'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of places we had pass'd, sport we had had,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of beasts of chase that haunt the Arcadian hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wild hog, and bear, and mountain-deer, and roe;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Last, of our quarters with the Arcadian chiefs.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For courteous entertainment, welcome warm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sad, reverential homage, had our prince<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From all, for his great lineage and his woes;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All which he own'd, and praised with grateful mind.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But still over his speech a gloom there hung,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As of one shadow'd by impending death;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And strangely, as we talk'd, he would apply<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The story of spots mention'd to his own;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Telling us, Arn&ecirc; minded him, he too<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was saved a babe, but to a life obscure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which he, the seed of Heracles, dragg'd on<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Inglorious, and should drop at last unknown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even as those dead unepitaph'd, who lie<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the stone coffins at Orchomenus.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, then, he bade remember how we pass'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Mantine&auml;n Sanctuary, forbid<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_381" id="Page_381">[381]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">To foot of mortal, where his ancestor,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Named &AElig;pytus like him, having gone in,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was blinded by the outgushing springs of brine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, turning westward to the Adder's Hill&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Another ancestor, named, too, like me,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Died of a snake-bite</i>, said he, <i>on that brow;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Still at his mountain-tomb men marvel, built</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Where, as life ebb'd, his bearers laid him down.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">So he play'd on; then ended, with a smile:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>This region is not happy for my race.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">We cheer'd him; but, that moment, from the copse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the lake-edge, broke the sharp cry of hounds;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The prickers shouted that the stag was gone.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We sprang upon our feet, we snatch'd our spears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We bounded down the swarded slope, we plunged<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the dense ilex-thickets to the dogs.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far in the woods ahead their music rang;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And many times that morn we coursed in ring<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The forests round that belt Cyllen&ecirc;'s side;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till I, thrown out and tired, came to halt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On that same spur where we had sate at morn.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And resting there to breathe, I watch'd the chase&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rare, straggling hunters, foil'd by brake and crag,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the prince, single, pressing on the rear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of that unflagging quarry and the hounds.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now in the woods far down I saw them cross<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An open glade; now he was high aloft<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On some tall scar fringed with dark feathery pines,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Peering to spy a goat-track down the cliff,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cheering with hand, and voice, and horn his dogs.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At last the cry drew to the water's edge&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And through the brushwood, to the pebbly strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Broke, black with sweat, the antler'd mountain-stag,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_382" id="Page_382">[382]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And took the lake. Two hounds alone pursued,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then came the prince; he shouted and plunged in.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;There is a chasm rifted in the base<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of that unfooted precipice, whose rock<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Walls on one side the deep Stymphalian Lake;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There the lake-waters, which in ages gone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wash'd, as the marks upon the hills still show,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All the Stymphalian plain, are now suck'd down.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A headland, with one aged plane-tree crown'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Parts from this cave-pierced cliff the shelving bay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where first the chase plunged in; the bay is smooth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But round the headland's point a current sets,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Strong, black, tempestuous, to the cavern-mouth.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stoutly, under the headland's lee, they swam;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when they came abreast the point, the race<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Caught them as wind takes feathers, whirl'd them round<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Struggling in vain to cross it, swept them on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stag, dogs, and hunter, to the yawning gulph.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All this, O King, not piecemeal, as to thee<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now told, but in one flashing instant pass'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While from the turf whereon I lay I sprang<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And took three strides, quarry and dogs were gone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A moment more&mdash;I saw the prince turn round<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once in the black and arrowy race, and cast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An arm aloft for help; then sweep beneath<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The low-brow'd cavern-arch, and disappear.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And what I could, I did&mdash;to call by cries<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some straggling hunters to my aid, to rouse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fishers who live on the lake-side, to launch<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Boats, and approach, near as we dared, the chasm.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But of the prince nothing remain'd, save this,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His boar-spear's broken shaft, back on the lake<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cast by the rumbling subterranean stream;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_383" id="Page_383">[383]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And this, at landing spied by us and saved,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His broad-brimm'd hunter's hat, which, in the bay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where first the stag took water, floated still.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I across the mountains brought with haste<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Cypselus, at Basilis, this news&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Basilis, his new city, which he now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Near Lycosura builds, Lycaon's town,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First city founded on the earth by men.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He to thee sends me on, in one thing glad,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While all else grieves him, that his grandchild's death<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Extinguishes distrust 'twixt him and thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But I from our deplored mischance learn this:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The man who to untimely death is doom'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vainly you hedge him from the assault of harm;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He bears the seed of ruin in himself.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So dies the last shoot of our royal tree!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who shall tell Merope this heavy news?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Stranger, this news thou bringest is too great<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For instant comment, having many sides<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of import, and in silence best received,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whether it turn at last to joy or woe.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou, the zealous bearer, hast no part<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In what it hath of painful, whether now,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First heard, or in its future issue shown.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou for thy labour hast deserved our best<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Refreshment, needed by thee, as I judge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With mountain-travel and night-watching spent.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the guest-chamber lead him, some one! give<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All entertainment which a traveller needs,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_384" id="Page_384">[384]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And such as fits a royal house to show;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To friends, still more, and labourers in our cause.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i10">[<span class="smcap">Attendants</span> <i>conduct</i> <span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span> <i>within the palace</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The youth is gone within; alas! he bears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A presence sad for some one through those doors.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Admire then, maidens, how in one short hour<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The schemes, pursued in vain for twenty years,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are&mdash;by a stroke, though undesired, complete&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crown'd with success, not in my way, but Heaven's!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This at a moment, too, when I had urged<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A last, long-cherish'd project, in my aim<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of peace, and been repulsed with hate and scorn.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fair terms of reconcilement, equal rule,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I offer'd to my foes, and they refused;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Worse terms than mine they have obtain'd from Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dire is this blow for Merope; and I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wish'd, truly wish'd, solution to our broil<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Other than by this death; but it hath come!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I speak no word of boast, but this I say:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A private loss here founds a nation's peace.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i18">[<span class="smcap">Polyphontes</span> <i>goes out</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Peace, who tarriest too long;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Peace, with delight in thy train;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, come back to our prayer!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then shall the revel again<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Visit our streets, and the sound<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_385" id="Page_385">[385]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the harp be heard with the pipe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the flashing torches appear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the marriage-train coming on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With dancing maidens and boys&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While the matrons come to the doors,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the old men rise from their bench,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the youths bring home the bride.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not condemn'd by my voice <br /></span>
<span class="i0">He who restores thee shall be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not unfavour'd by Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Surely no sinner the man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dread though his acts, to whose hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Such a boon to bring hath been given.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let her come, fair Peace! let her come!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the demons long nourish'd here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Murder, Discord, and Hate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the stormy desolate waves<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the Thracian Sea let her leave,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or the howling outermost main!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i18">[<span class="smcap">Merope</span> <i>comes forth</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">A whisper through the palace flies of one<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Arrived from Tegea with weighty news:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I came, thinking to find Arcas here.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ye have not left this gate, which he must pass;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tell me&mdash;hath one not come? or, worse mischance,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, but been intercepted by the King?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">A messenger, sent from Arcadia here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Arrived, and of the King had speech but now.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_386" id="Page_386">[386]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah me! the wrong expectant got his news.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The message brought was for the King design'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">How so? was Arcas not the messenger?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">A younger man, and of a different name.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And what Arcadian news had he to tell?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Learn that from other lips, O Queen, than mine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He kept his tale, then, for the King alone?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">His tale was meeter for that ear than thine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Why dost thou falter, and make half reply?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O thrice unhappy, how I groan thy fate!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_387" id="Page_387">[387]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou frightenest and confound'st me by thy words.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O were but Arcas come, all would be well?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">If so, all's well: for look, the old man speeds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Up from the city tow'rd this gated hill.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">[<span class="smcap">Arcas</span> <i>comes in</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not with the failing breath and foot of age<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My faithful follower comes. Welcome, old friend!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Faithful, not welcome, when my tale is told.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O that my over-speed and bursting grief<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had on the journey choked my labouring breath,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lock'd my speech for ever in my breast!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet then another man would bring this news,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wherewith from end to end Arcadia rings.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O honour'd Queen, thy son, my charge, is gone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Too suddenly thou tellest such a loss.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Look up, O Queen! look up, O mistress dear!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Look up, and see thy friends who comfort thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah ... Ah ... Ah me!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i17">And I, too, say, ah me!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_388" id="Page_388">[388]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Forgive, forgive the bringer of such news!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Better from thine than from an enemy's tongue.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And yet no enemy did this, O Queen:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the wit-baffling will and hand of Heaven.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No enemy! and what hast thou, then, heard?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swift as I came, hath falsehood been before?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">A youth arrived but now&mdash;the son, he said,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of an Arcadian lord&mdash;our prince's friend&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Jaded with travel, clad in hunter's garb.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He brought report that his own eyes had seen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The prince, in chase after a swimming stag,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swept down a chasm rifted in the cliff<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which hangs o'er the Stymphalian Lake, and drown'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah me! with what a foot doth treason post,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While loyalty, with all her speed, is slow!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Another tale, I trow, thy messenger<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the King's private ear reserves, like this<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In one thing only, that the prince is dead.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And how then runs this true and private tale?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_389" id="Page_389">[389]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">As much to the King's wish, more to his shame.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This young Arcadian noble, guard and mate<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To &AElig;pytus, the king seduced with gold,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And had him at the prince's side in leash,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ready to slip on his unconscious prey.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He on a hunting party two days since,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Among the forests on Cyllen&ecirc;'s side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Perform'd good service for his bloody wage;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our prince, and the good Laias, whom his ward<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had in a father's place, he basely murder'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis so, 'tis so, alas, for see the proof:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Uncle and nephew disappear; their death<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is charged against this stripling; agents, fee'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To ply 'twixt the Messenian king and him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come forth, denounce the traffic and the traitor.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seized, he escapes&mdash;and next I find him here.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Take this for true, the other tale for feign'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The youth, thou say'st, we saw and heard but now&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He comes to tell his prompter he hath sped.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Still he repeats the drowning story here.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">To thee&mdash;that needs no &OElig;dipus to explain.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_390" id="Page_390">[390]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Interpret, then; for we, it seems, are dull.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Your King desired the profit of his death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not the black credit of his murderer.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That stern word "<i>murder</i>" had too dread a sound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the Messenian hearts, who loved the prince.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Suspicion grave I see, but no firm proof.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Peace! peace! all's clear.&mdash;The wicked watch and work<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While the good sleep; the workers have the day.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yes! yes! now I conceive the liberal grace<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of this far-scheming tyrant, and his boon<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of heirship to his kingdom for my son:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He had his murderer ready, and the sword<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lifted, and that unwish'd-for heirship void&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A tale, meanwhile, forged for his subjects' ears&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And me, henceforth sole rival with himself<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In their allegiance, me, in my son's death-hour,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When all turn'd tow'rds me, me he would have shown<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To my Messenians, duped, disarm'd, despised,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The willing sharer of his guilty rule,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All claim to succour forfeit, to myself<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hateful, by each Messenian heart abhorr'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His offers I repell'd&mdash;but what of that?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If with no rage, no fire of righteous hate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Such as ere now hath spurr'd to fearful deeds<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_391" id="Page_391">[391]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Weak women with a thousandth part my wrongs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But calm, but unresentful, I endured<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His offers, coldly heard them, cold repell'd?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How must men think me abject, void of heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While all this time I bear to linger on<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In this blood-deluged palace, in whose halls<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Either a vengeful Fury I should stalk,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or else not live at all!&mdash;but here I haunt,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A pale, unmeaning ghost, powerless to fright<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or harm, and nurse my longing for my son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A helpless one, I know it&mdash;but the Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have temper'd me e'en thus, and, in some souls,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Misery, which rouses others, breaks the spring.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And even now, my son, ah me! my son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fain would I fade away, as I have lived,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Without a cry, a struggle, or a blow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All vengeance unattempted, and descend<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the invisible plains, to roam with thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fit denizen, the lampless under-world&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But with what eyes should I encounter there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My husband, wandering with his stern compeers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Amphiaraos, or Mycen&aelig;'s king,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who led the Greeks to Ilium, Agamemnon,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Betray'd like him, but, not like him, avenged?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or with what voice shall I the questions meet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of my two elder sons, slain long ago,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who sadly ask me, what, if not revenge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Kept me, their mother, from their side so long?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or how reply to thee, my child last-born,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Last-murder'd, who reproachfully wilt say:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Mother, I well believed thou lived'st on</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>In the detested palace of thy foe,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>With patience on thy face, death in thy heart,</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_392" id="Page_392">[392]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Counting, till I grew up, the laggard years,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>That our joint hands might then together pay</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>To our unhappy house the debt we owe.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>My death makes my debt void, and doubles thine&mdash;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>But down thou fleest here, and leav'st our scourge</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Triumphant, and condemnest all our race</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>To lie in gloom, for ever unappeased.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">What shall I have to answer to such words?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No, something must be dared; and, great as erst<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our dastard patience, be our daring now!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, ye swift Furies, who to him ye haunt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Permit no peace till your behests are done;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come Hermes, who dost friend the unjustly kill'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And can'st teach simple ones to plot and feign;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, lightning Passion, that with foot of fire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Advancest to the middle of a deed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Almost before 'tis plann'd; come, glowing Hate;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come, baneful Mischief, from thy murky den<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Under the dripping black Tartarean cliff<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which Styx's awful waters trickle down&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Inspire this coward heart, this flagging arm!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How say ye, maidens, do ye know these prayers?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are these words Merope's&mdash;is this voice mine?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Old man, old man, thou had'st my boy in charge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he is lost, and thou hast that to atone!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fly, find me on the instant where confer<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The murderer and his impious setter-on&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And ye, keep faithful silence, friends, and mark<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What one weak woman can achieve alone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O mistress, by the Gods, do nothing rash!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_393" id="Page_393">[393]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Unfaithful servant, dost thou, too, desert me?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I go! I go!&mdash;The King holds council&mdash;there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will I seek tidings. Take, the while, this word:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Attempting deeds beyond thy power to do,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou nothing profitest thy friends, but mak'st<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our misery more, and thine own ruin sure.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">[<span class="smcap">Arcas</span> <i>goes out</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I have heard, O Queen, how a prince, <i>str.</i> 1.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Agamemnon's son, in Mycen&aelig;,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Orestes, died but in name,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lived for the death of his foes.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Peace!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i7">What is it?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i17">Alas,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou destroyest me!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">How?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Whispering hope of a life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which no stranger unknown,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_394" id="Page_394">[394]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the faithful servant and nurse,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose tears warrant his truth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bears sad witness is lost.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 1<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wheresoe'er men are, there is grief.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In a thousand countries, a thousand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Homes, e'en now is there wail;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mothers lamenting their sons.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Thou knowest it?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i21">This,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who lives, witnesses.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i18">True.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But is it only a fate<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sure, all-common, to lose<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In a land of friends, by a friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One last, murder-saved child?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str.</i> 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah me!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_395" id="Page_395">[395]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou confessest the prize<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the rushing, thundering, mad,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cloud-enveloped, obscure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unapplauded, unsung<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Race of calamity, mine?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">None can truly claim that<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mournful pre&euml;minence, not<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i5">Fate <i>gives</i> it, ah me!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not, above all, in the doubts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Double and clashing, that hang&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant.</i> 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What then? <br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seems it lighter, my loss,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If, perhaps, unpierced by the sword,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My child lies in his jagg'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sunless prison of rock,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the black wave borne to and fro?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Worse, far worse, if his friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If the Arcadian within,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If&mdash;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_396" id="Page_396">[396]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i> (<i>with a start</i>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i9">How say'st thou? within?...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He in the guest-chamber now,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Faithlessly murder'd his friend.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ye, too, ye, too, join to betray, then<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Your Queen!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i17">What is this?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i24">Ye knew,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O false friends! into what<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Haven the murderer had dropp'd?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ye kept silence?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i25">In fear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O loved mistress! in fear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dreading thine over-wrought mood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What I knew, I conceal'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Swear by the Gods henceforth to obey me!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Unhappy one, what deed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Purposes thy despair?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I promise; but I fear.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_397" id="Page_397">[397]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">From the altar, the unavenged tomb,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fetch me the sacrifice-axe!&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6">[<span class="smcap">The Chorus</span> <i>goes towards the tomb of</i> <span class="smcap">Cresphontes</span>,<br /></span>
<span class="i8"><i>and their leader brings back the axe.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O Husband, O clothed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With the grave's everlasting,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All-covering darkness! O King,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Well-mourn'd, but ill-avenged!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Approv'st thou thy wife now?&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The axe!&mdash;who brings it?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i21">'Tis here!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thy gesture, thy look,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Appals me, shakes me with awe.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thrust back now the bolt of that door!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Alas! alas!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behold the fastenings withdrawn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the guest-chamber door!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah! I beseech thee&mdash;with tears&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Throw the door open!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_398" id="Page_398">[398]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">'Tis done!...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">[<i>The door of the house is thrown open: the interior</i><br /></span>
<span class="i10"><i>of the guest-chamber is discovered, with</i><br /></span>
<span class="i10"><i><span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span> asleep on a couch.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He sleeps&mdash;sleeps calm. O ye all-seeing Gods!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thus peacefully do ye let sinners sleep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While troubled innocents toss, and lie awake?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What sweeter sleep than this could I desire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For thee, my child, if thou wert yet alive?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How often have I dream'd of thee like this,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With thy soil'd hunting-coat, and sandals torn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Asleep in the Arcadian glens at noon,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy head droop'd softly, and the golden curls<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clustering o'er thy white forehead, like a girl's;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The short proud lip showing thy race, thy cheeks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Brown'd with thine open-air, free, hunter's life.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah me!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And where dost thou sleep now, my innocent boy?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In some dark fir-tree's shadow, amid rocks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Untrodden, on Cyllen&ecirc;'s desolate side;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where travellers never pass, where only come<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wild beasts, and vultures sailing overhead.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There, there thou liest now, my hapless child!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stretch'd among briars and stones, the slow, black gore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oozing through thy soak'd hunting-shirt, with limbs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet stark from the death-struggle, tight-clench'd hands,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And eyeballs staring for revenge in vain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah miserable!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou, thou fair-skinn'd Serpent! thou art laid<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_399" id="Page_399">[399]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">In a rich chamber, on a happy bed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In a king's house, thy victim's heritage;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And drink'st untroubled slumber, to sleep off<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The toils of thy foul service, till thou wake<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Refresh'd, and claim thy master's thanks and gold.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wake up in hell from thine unhallow'd sleep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou smiling Fiend, and claim thy guerdon there!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wake amid gloom, and howling, and the noise<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of sinners pinion'd on the torturing wheel,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the stanch Furies' never-silent scourge.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bid the chief tormentors there provide<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For a grand culprit shortly coming down.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Go thou the first, and usher in thy lord!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A more just stroke than that thou gav'st my son<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Take&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">[<span class="smcap">Merope</span> <i>advances towards the sleeping</i> <span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span>,<br /></span>
<span class="i10"><i>with the axe uplifted. At the same moment</i><br /></span>
<span class="i10"><i><span class="smcap">Arcas</span> re-enters.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i> (<i>to the Chorus</i>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i12">Not with him to council did the King<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Carry his messenger, but left him here.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i16">[<i>Sees</i> <span class="smcap">Merope</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O Gods!...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Foolish old man, thou spoil'st my blow!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What do I see?...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">A murderer at death's door.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Therefore no words!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_400" id="Page_400">[400]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">A murderer?...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i23">And a captive<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the dear next-of-kin of him he murder'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stand, and let vengeance pass!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">Hold, O Queen, hold!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou know'st not whom thou strik'st....<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">I know his crime.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Unhappy one! thou strik'st&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">A most just blow.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No, by the Gods, thou slay'st&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i22">Stand off!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i22">Thy son!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_401" id="Page_401">[401]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah!...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i10">[<i>She lets the axe drop, and falls insensible.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i> (<i>awaking</i>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Who are these? What shrill, ear-piercing scream<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wakes me thus kindly from the perilous sleep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wherewith fatigue and youth had bound mine eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even in the deadly palace of my foe?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Arcas! Thou here?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i> (<i>embracing him</i>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">O my dear master! O<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My child, my charge beloved, welcome to life!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As dead we held thee, mourn'd for thee as dead.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In word I died, that I in deed might live.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But who are these?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i15">Messenian maidens, friends.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And, Arcas!&mdash;but I tremble!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i24">Boldly ask.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That black-robed, swooning figure?...<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_402" id="Page_402">[402]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Arcas</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">Merope.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O mother! mother!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">Who upbraids me? Ah!...<br /></span>
<span class="i22">[<i>seeing the axe</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Upbraids thee? no one.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i12">Thou dost well: but take....<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What wav'st thou off?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i18">That murderous axe away!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thy son is here.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i13">One said so, sure, but now.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Here, here thou hast him!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_403" id="Page_403">[403]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i7">Slaughter'd by this hand!...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No, by the Gods, alive and like to live!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What, thou?&mdash;I dream&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i14">May'st thou dream ever so!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i> (<i>advancing towards him</i>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">My child? unhurt?...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i16">Only by over joy<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Art thou, then, come?...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">Never to part again.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">[<i>They fall into one another's arms. Then</i> <span class="smcap">Merope</span>,<br /></span>
<span class="i10"><i>holding</i> <span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span> <i>by the hand, turns to</i> <span class="smcap">The<br /></span></span>
<span class="i0"><span class="smcap">Chorus</span>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O kind Messenian maidens, O my friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bear witness, see, mark well, on what a head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My first stroke of revenge had nearly fallen!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_404" id="Page_404">[404]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We see, dear mistress: and we say, the Gods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As hitherto they kept him, keep him now.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O my son!                                <i>str.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">I have, I have thee ... the years<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fly back, my child! and thou seem'st<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ne'er to have gone from these eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Never been torn from this breast.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Mother, my heart runs over; but the time<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Presses me, chides me, will not let me weep.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Fearest thou now?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I fear not, but I think on my design.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">At the undried fount of this breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A babe, thou smilest again.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy brothers play at my feet,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Early-slain innocents! near,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy kind-speaking father stands.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Remember, to revenge his death I come!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_405" id="Page_405">[405]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ah ... revenge! <i>ant.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">That word! it kills me! I see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once more roll back on my house,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Never to ebb, the accurst<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All-flooding ocean of blood.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Mother, sometimes the justice of the Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Appoints the way to peace through shedding blood.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sorrowful peace!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And yet the only peace to us allow'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">From the first-wrought vengeance is born<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A long succession of crimes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fresh blood flows, calling for blood.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fathers, sons, grandsons, are all<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One death-dealing vengeful train.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Mother, thy fears are idle; for I come<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To close an old wound, not to open new.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In all else willing to be taught, in this<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Instruct me not; I have my lesson clear.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Arcas, seek out my uncle Laias, now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Conferring in the city with our friends;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_406" id="Page_406">[406]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here bring him, ere the king come back from council.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That, how to accomplish what the Gods enjoin,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the slow-ripening time at last prepares,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We two with thee, my mother, may consult;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For whose help dare I count on, if not thine?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Approves my brother Laias this intent?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes, and alone is with me here to share.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And what of thine Arcadian mate, who bears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Suspicion from thy grandsire of thy death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For whom, as I suppose, thou passest here?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sworn to our plot he is; if false surmise<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fix him the author of my death, I know not.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Proof, not surmise, shows him in commerce close&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">With this Messenian tyrant&mdash;that I know.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And entertain'st thou, child, such dangerous friends?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">This commerce for my best behoof he plies.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_407" id="Page_407">[407]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That thou may'st read thine enemy's counsel plain?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Too dear his secret wiles have cost our house.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And of his unsure agent what demands he?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">News of my business, pastime, temper, friends.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">His messages, then, point not to thy murder?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not yet, though such, no doubt, his final aim.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And what Arcadian helpers bring'st thou here?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Laias alone; no errand mine for crowds.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">On what relying, to crush such a foe?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">One sudden stroke, and the Messenians' love.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_408" id="Page_408">[408]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O thou long-lost, long seen in dreams alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But now seen face to face, my only child!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why wilt thou fly to lose as soon as found<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My new-won treasure, thy belov&eacute;d life?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or how expectest not to lose, who com'st<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With such slight means to cope with such a foe?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thine enemy thou know'st not, nor his strength.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The stroke thou purposest is desperate, rash&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet grant that it succeeds&mdash;thou hast behind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The stricken king a second enemy<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Scarce dangerous less than him, the Dorian lords.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These are not now the savage band who erst<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Follow'd thy father from their northern hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mere ruthless and uncounsell'd wolves of war,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Good to obey, without a leader nought.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their chief hath train'd them, made them like himself,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sagacious, men of iron, watchful, firm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against surprise and sudden panic proof.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their master fall'n, these will not flinch, but band<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To keep their master's power; thou wilt find<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behind his corpse their hedge of serried spears.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, to match these, thou hast the people's love?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On what a reed, my child, thou leanest there!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Knowest thou not how timorous, how unsure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How useless an ally a people is<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against the one and certain arm of power?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy father perish'd in this people's cause,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Perish'd before their eyes, yet no man stirr'd!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For years, his widow, in their sight I stand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A never-changing index to revenge&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What help, what vengeance, at their hands have I?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_409" id="Page_409">[409]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At least, if thou wilt trust them, try them first.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against the King himself array the host<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou countest on to back thee 'gainst his lords;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First rally the Messenians to thy cause,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Give them cohesion, purpose, and resolve,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Marshal them to an army&mdash;then advance,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then try the issue; and not, rushing on<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Single and friendless, give to certain death<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That dear-beloved, that young, that gracious head.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be guided, O my son! spurn counsel not!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For know thou this, a violent heart hath been<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fatal to all the race of Heracles.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">With sage experience she speaks; and thou,<br /></span>
<span class="i8">O &AElig;pytus, weigh well her counsel given.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Ill counsel, in my judgment, gives she here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Maidens, and reads experience much amiss;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Discrediting the succour which our cause<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might from the people draw, if rightly used;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Advising us a course which would, indeed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If follow'd, make their succour slack and null.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A people is no army, train'd to fight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A passive engine, at their general's will;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, if so used, proves, as thou say'st, unsure.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A people, like a common man, is dull,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is lifeless, while its heart remains untouch'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A fool can drive it, and a fly may scare.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When it admires and loves, its heart awakes:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then irresistibly it lives, it works;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_410" id="Page_410">[410]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">A people, then, is an ally indeed&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It is ten thousand fiery wills in one.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now I, if I invite them to run risk<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of life for my advantage, and myself,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who chiefly profit, run no more than they&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How shall I rouse their love, their ardour so?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, if some signal, unassisted stroke,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dealt at my own sole risk, before their eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Announces me their rightful prince return'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The undegenerate blood of Heracles&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The daring claimant of a perilous throne&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How might not such a sight as this revive<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their loyal passion tow'rd my father's house,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Kindle their hearts, make them no more a mob,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A craven mob, but a devouring fire?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then might I use them, then, for one who thus<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Spares not himself, themselves they will not spare.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Haply, had but one daring soul stood forth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To rally them and lead them to revenge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When my great father fell, they had replied!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alas! our foe alone stood forward then.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou, my mother, hadst thou made a sign&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hadst thou, from thy forlorn and captive state<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of widowhood in these polluted halls,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy prison-house, raised one imploring cry&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who knows but that avengers thou hadst found?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But mute thou sat'st, and each Messenian heart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In thy despondency desponded too.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Enough of this!&mdash;Though not a finger stir<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To succour me in my extremest need;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though all free spirits in this land were dead,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And only slaves and tyrants left alive;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet for me, mother, I had liefer die<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_411" id="Page_411">[411]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">On native ground, than drag the tedious hours<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of a protected exile any more.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hate, duty, interest, passion call one way;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here stand I now, and the attempt shall be.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Prudence is on the other side; but deeds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Condemn'd by prudence have sometimes gone well.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not till the ways of prudence all are tried,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And tried in vain, the turn of rashness comes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou leapest to thy deed, and hast not ask'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy kinsfolk and thy father's friends for aid.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And to what friends should I for aid apply?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The royal race of Temenus, in Argos&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That house, like ours, intestine murder maims.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thy Spartan cousins, Procles and his brother&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Love a won cause, but not a cause to win.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">My father, then, and his Arcadian chiefs&mdash;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_412" id="Page_412">[412]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Mean still to keep aloof from Dorian broil.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Wait, then, until sufficient help appears.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Orestes in Mycen&aelig; had no more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He to fulfil an order raised his hand.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What order more precise had he than I?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Apollo peal'd it from his Delphian cave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">A mother's murder needed hest divine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He had a hest, at least, and thou hast none.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The Gods command not where the heart speaks clear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou wilt destroy, I see, thyself and us.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_413" id="Page_413">[413]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O suffering! O calamity! how ten,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How twentyfold worse are ye, when your blows<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not only wound the sense, but kill the soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The noble thought, which is alone the man!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That I, to-day returning, find myself<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Orphan'd of both my parents&mdash;by his foes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My father, by your strokes my mother slain!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For this is not my mother, who dissuades,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At the dread altar of her husband's tomb,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His son from vengeance on his murderer;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And not alone dissuades him, but compares<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His just revenge to an unnatural deed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A deed so awful, that the general tongue<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fluent of horrors, falters to relate it&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of darkness so tremendous, that its author,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though to his act empower'd, nay, impell'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the oracular sentence of the Gods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fled, for years after, o'er the face of earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A frenzied wanderer, a God-driven man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hardly yet, some say, hath found a grave&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With such a deed as <i>this</i> thou matchest mine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which Nature sanctions, which the innocent blood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clamours to find fulfill'd, which good men praise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And only bad men joy to see undone!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O honour'd father! hide thee in thy grave<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Deep as thou canst, for hence no succour comes;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Since from thy faithful subjects what revenge<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Canst thou expect, when thus thy widow fails?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alas! an adamantine strength indeed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Past expectation, hath thy murderer built;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_414" id="Page_414">[414]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">For this is the true strength of guilty kings,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When they corrupt the souls of those they rule.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Zeal makes him most unjust; but, in good time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here, as I guess, the noble Laias comes.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Laias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Break off, break off your talking, and depart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Each to his post, where the occasion calls;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lest from the council-chamber presently<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The King return, and find you prating here.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A time will come for greetings; but to-day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hour for words is gone, is come for deeds.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O princely Laias! to what purpose calls<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The occasion, if our chief confederate fails?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My mother stands aloof, and blames our deed.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Laias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">My royal sister?... but, without some cause,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know, she honours not the dead so ill.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Brother, it seems thy sister must present,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At this first meeting after absence long,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not welcome, exculpation to her kin;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet exculpation needs it, if I seek,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A woman and a mother, to avert<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Risk from my new-restored, my only son?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_415" id="Page_415">[415]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sometimes, when he was gone, I wish'd him back,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Risk what he might; now that I have him here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now that I feed mine eyes on that young face,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hear that fresh voice, and clasp that gold-lock'd head,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I shudder, Laias, to commit my child<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To murder's dread arena, where I saw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His father and his ill-starr'd brethren fall!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I loathe for him the slippery way of blood;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I ask if bloodless means may gain his end.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In me the fever of revengeful hate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Passion's first furious longing to imbrue<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our own right hand in the detested blood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of enemies, and count their dying groans&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If in this feeble bosom such a fire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Did ever burn&mdash;is long by time allay'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I would now have Justice strike, not me.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Besides&mdash;for from my brother and my son<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I hide not even this&mdash;the reverence deep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Remorseful, tow'rd my hostile solitude,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By Polyphontes never fail'd-in once<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through twenty years; his mournful anxious zeal<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To efface in me the memory of his crime&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though it efface not that, yet makes me wish<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His death a public, not a personal act,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Treacherously plotted 'twixt my son and me;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To whom this day he came to proffer peace,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Treaty, and to this kingdom for my son<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Heirship, with fair intent, as I believe.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For that he plots thy death, account it false;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i22">[<i>to</i> <span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Number it with the thousand rumours vain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Figments of plots, wherewith intriguers fill<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The enforc&eacute;d leisure of an exile's ear.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_416" id="Page_416">[416]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Immersed in serious state-craft is the King,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bent above all to pacify, to rule,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rigidly, yet in settled calm, this realm;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not prone, all say, averse to bloodshed now.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So much is due to truth, even tow'rds our foe.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i24">[<i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Laias</span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Do I, then, give to usurpation grace,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from his natural rights my son debar?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not so! let him&mdash;and none shall be more prompt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than I to help&mdash;raise his Messenian friends;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let him fetch succours from Arcadia, gain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His Argive or his Spartan cousins' aid;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let him do this, do aught but recommence<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Murder's uncertain, secret, perilous game&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I, when to his righteous standard down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flies Victory wing'd, and Justice raises <i>then</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her sword, will be the first to bid it fall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If, haply, at this moment, such attempt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Promise not fair, let him a little while<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have faith, and trust the future and the Gods.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He may; for never did the Gods allow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fast permanence to an ill-gotten throne.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These are but woman's words&mdash;yet, Laias, thou<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Despise them not! for, brother, thou and I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were not among the feuds of warrior-chiefs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Each sovereign for his dear-bought hour, born;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But in the pastoral Arcadia rear'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With Cypselus our father, where we saw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The simple patriarchal state of kings,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where sire to son transmits the unquestion'd crown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unhack'd, unsmirch'd, unbloodied, and have learnt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That spotless hands unshaken sceptres hold.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Having learnt this, then, use thy knowledge now.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_417" id="Page_417">[417]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Which way to lean I know not: bloody strokes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are never free from doubt, though sometimes due.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Laias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O Merope, the common heart of man<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Agrees to deem some deeds so dark in guilt,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That neither gratitude, nor tie of race,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Womanly pity, nor maternal fear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor any pleader else, shall be indulged<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To breathe a syllable to bar revenge.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All this, no doubt, thou to thyself hast urged&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Time presses, so that theme forbear I now;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Direct to thy dissuasions I reply.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blood-founded thrones, thou say'st, are insecure;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our father's kingdom, because pure, is safe.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">True; but what cause to our Arcadia gives<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Its privileged immunity from blood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But that, since first the black and fruitful Earth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the primeval mountain-forests bore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pelasgus, our forefather and mankind's,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Legitimately sire to son, with us,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bequeaths the allegiance of our shepherd-tribes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More loyal, as our line continues more?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How can your Heracleidan chiefs inspire<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This awe which guards our earth-sprung, lineal kings?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What permanence, what stability like ours,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whether blood flows or no, can yet invest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The broken order of your Dorian thrones,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fix'd yesterday, and ten times changed since then?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Two brothers, and their orphan nephews, strove<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_418" id="Page_418">[418]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the three conquer'd kingdoms of this isle;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The eldest, mightiest brother, Temenus, took<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Argos; a juggle to Cresphontes gave<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Messenia; to those helpless Boys, the lot<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Worst of the three, the stony Sparta, fell.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">August, indeed, was the foundation here!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What follow'd?&mdash;His most trusted kinsman slew<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cresphontes in Messenia; Temenus<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Perish'd in Argos by his jealous sons;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Spartan Brothers with their guardian strive.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Can houses thus ill-seated, thus embroil'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thus little founded in their subjects' love,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Practise the indulgent, bloodless policy<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of dynasties long-fix'd, and honour'd long?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No! Vigour and severity must chain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Popular reverence to these recent lines.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be their first-founded order strict maintain'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their murder'd rulers terribly avenged&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ruthlessly their rebellious subjects crush'd!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Since policy bids thus, what fouler death<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than thine illustrious husband's to avenge<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall we select? than Polyphontes, what<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More daring and more grand offender find?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Justice, my sister, long demands this blow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Wisdom, now thou see'st, demands it too.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To strike it, then, dissuade thy son no more;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For to live disobedient to these two,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Justice and Wisdom, is no life at all.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The Gods, O mistress dear! the hard-soul'd man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who spared not others, bid not us to spare.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_419" id="Page_419">[419]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Alas! against my brother, son, and friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One, and a woman, how can I prevail?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O brother, thou hast conquer'd; yet, I fear!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Son! with a doubting heart thy mother yields;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May it turn happier than my doubts portend!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Laias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Meantime on thee the task of silence only<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall be imposed; to us shall be the deed.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now, not another word, but to our act!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nephew! thy friends are sounded, and prove true.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy father's murderer, in the public place,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Performs, this noon, a solemn sacrifice;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be with him&mdash;choose the moment&mdash;strike thy blow!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If prudence counsels thee to go unarm'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sacrificer's axe will serve thy turn.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To me and the Messenians leave the rest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With the Gods' aid&mdash;and, if they give but aid<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As our just cause deserves, I do not fear.<br /></span>
<span class="i10">[<span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus, Laias</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Arcas</span> <i>go out</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str</i>. 1.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O Son and Mother,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom the Gods o'ershadow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In dangerous trial,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With certainty of favour!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As erst they shadow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Your race's founders<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From irretrievable woe;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the seed of Lycaon<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_420" id="Page_420">[420]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lay forlorn, lay outcast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Callisto and her Boy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant</i>. 1.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What deep-grass'd meadow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At the meeting valleys&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where clear-flowing Ladon,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Most beautiful of waters,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Receives the river<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose trout are vocal,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Aroanian stream&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Without home, without mother,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hid the babe, hid Arcas,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The nursling of the dells?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str</i>. 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the sweet-smelling myrtle,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the pink-flower'd oleander,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the green agnus-castus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the west-wind's murmur,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rustled round his cradle;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Maia rear'd him.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then, a boy, he startled,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the snow-fill'd hollows<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of high Cyllen&ecirc;,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The white mountain-birds;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or surprised, in the glens,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The basking tortoises,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose striped shell founded<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the hand of Hermes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The glory of the lyre.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant</i>. 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But his mother, Callisto,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In her hiding-place of the thickets<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the lentisk and ilex<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In her rough form, fearing<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_421" id="Page_421">[421]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hunter on the outlook,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Poor changeling! trembled.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or the children, plucking<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the thorn-choked gullies<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wild gooseberries, scared her,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The shy mountain-bear!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or the shepherds, on slopes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With pale-spiked lavender<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And crisp thyme tufted,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Came upon her, stealing<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At day-break through the dew.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str</i>. 3.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once, 'mid those gorges,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Spray-drizzled, lonely,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unclimb'd of man&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er whose cliffs the townsmen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of crag-perch'd Nonacris<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Behold in summer<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The slender torrent<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Styx come dancing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A wind-blown thread&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the precipices of Khelmos,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fleet, desperate hunter,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The youthful Arcas, born of Zeus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His fleeing mother,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Transform'd Callisto,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unwitting follow'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And raised his spear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant</i>. 3.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Turning, with piteous,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Distressful longing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sad, eager eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mutely she regarded<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her well-known enemy.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_422" id="Page_422">[422]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Low moans half utter'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What speech refused her;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tears coursed, tears human,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down those disfigured,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once human cheeks.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With unutterable foreboding<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her son, heart-stricken, eyed her.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Gods had pity, made them Stars.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stars now they sparkle<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the northern Heaven&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The guard Arcturus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The guard-watch'd Bear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>epode</i>.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So, o'er thee and thy child,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some God, Merope, now,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In dangerous hour, stretches his hand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So, like a star, dawns thy son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Radiant with fortune and joy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i18">[<span class="smcap">Polyphontes</span> <i>comes in</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O Merope, the trouble on thy face<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tells me enough thou know'st the news which all<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Messenia speaks! the prince, thy son, is dead.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not from my lips should consolation fall;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To offer that, I come not; but to urge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even after news of this sad death, our league.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yes, once again I come; I will not take<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This morning's angry answer for thy last.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the Messenian kingdom thou and I<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are the sole claimants left; what cause of strife<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lay in thy son is buried in his grave.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Most honourably I meant, I call the Gods<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_423" id="Page_423">[423]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">To witness, offering him return and power;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet, had he lived, suspicion, jealousy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Inevitably had surged up, perhaps,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Twixt thee and me&mdash;suspicion, that I nursed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some ill design against him; jealousy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That he enjoy'd but part, being heir to all.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he himself, with the impetuous heart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of youth, 'tis like, had never quite forgone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The thought of vengeance on me, never quite<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unclosed his itching fingers from his sword.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou, O Merope, though deeply wrong'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though injured past forgiveness, as men deem,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet hast been long at school with thoughtful time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from that teacher may'st have learn'd, like me,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That all may be endured, and all forgiv'n&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have learn'd, that we must sacrifice the bent<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of personal feeling to the public weal&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have learn'd, that there are guilty deeds, which leave<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The hand that does them guiltless; in a word,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That kings live for their peoples, not themselves.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This having known, let us a union found<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(For the last time I ask, ask earnestly)<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Based on pure public welfare; let us be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not Merope and Polyphontes, foes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blood-sever'd, but Messenia's King and Queen!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let us forget ourselves for those we rule!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Speak! I go hence to offer sacrifice<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the Preserver Zeus; let me return<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thanks to him for our amity as well.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Oh had'st thou, Polyphontes, still but kept<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The silence thou hast kept for twenty years!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_424" id="Page_424">[424]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Henceforth, if what I urge displease, I may.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But fair proposal merits fair reply.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And thou shalt have it! Yes, because thou <i>hast</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">For twenty years forborne to interrupt<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The solitude of her whom thou hast wrong'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That scanty grace shall earn thee this reply.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First, for our union. Trust me, 'twixt us two<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The brazen footed Fury ever stalks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Waving her hundred hands, a torch in each,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Aglow with angry fire, to keep us twain.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now, for thyself. Thou com'st with well-cloak'd joy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To announce the ruin of my husband's house,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To sound thy triumph in his widow's ears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To bid her share thine unendanger'd throne.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To this thou would'st have answer. Take it: Fly!...<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cut short thy triumph, seeming at its height;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fling off thy crown, supposed at last secure;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forsake this ample, proud Messenian realm;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To some small, humble, and unnoted strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some rock more lonely than that Lemnian isle<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where Philoctetes pined, take ship and flee!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some solitude more inaccessible<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than the ice-bastion'd Caucasian Mount<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Chosen a prison for Prometheus, climb!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There in unvoiced oblivion sink thy name,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bid the sun, thine only visitant,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Divulge not to the far-off world of men<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What once-famed wretch he there did espy hid.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There nurse a late remorse, and thank the Gods,
<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_425" id="Page_425">[425]</a></span></span>
<span class="i0">And thank thy bitterest foe, that, having lost<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All things but life, thou lose not life as well.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What mad bewilderment of grief is this?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>Thou</i> art bewilder'd; the sane head is mine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I pity thee, and wish thee calmer mind.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Pity thyself; none needs compassion more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet, oh! could'st thou but act as reason bids!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And in my turn I wish the same for thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">All I could do to soothe thee has been tried.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">For that, in this my warning, thou art paid.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Know'st thou then aught, that thus thou sound'st the alarm?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_426" id="Page_426">[426]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thy crime! that were enough to make one fear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">My deed is of old date, and long atoned.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Atoned this very day, perhaps, it is.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">My final victory proves the Gods appeased.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O victor, victor, trip not at the goal!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hatred and passionate envy blind thine eyes.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O Heaven-abandon'd wretch, that envies thee!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou hold'st so cheap, then, the Messenian crown?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I think on what the future hath in store.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">To-day I reign; the rest I leave to Fate.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_427" id="Page_427">[427]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">For Fate thou wait'st not long; since, in this hour&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What? for so far Fate hath not proved my foe&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Fate seals my lips, and drags to ruin thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Polyphontes</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Enough! enough! I will no longer hear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The ill-boding note which frantic hatred sounds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To affright a fortune which the Gods secure.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once more my friendship thou rejectest; well!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More for this land's sake grieve I, than mine own.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I chafe not with thee, that thy hate endures,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor bend myself too low, to make it yield.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What I have done is done; by my own deed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Neither exulting nor ashamed, I stand.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why should this heart of mine set mighty store<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the construction and report of men?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not men's good word hath made me what I am.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alone I master'd power; and alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Since so thou wilt, I dare maintain it still.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i16">[<span class="smcap">Polyphontes</span> <i>goes out</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str</i>. 1.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Did I then waver<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(O woman's judgment!)<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Misled by seeming<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_428" id="Page_428">[428]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Success of crime?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And ask, if sometimes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Gods, perhaps, allow'd you,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O lawless daring of the strong,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O self-will recklessly indulged?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant</i>. 1.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not time, not lightning,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not rain, not thunder,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Efface the endless<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Decrees of Heaven&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Make Justice alter,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Revoke, assuage her sentence,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which dooms dread ends to dreadful deeds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And violent deaths to violent men.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str</i>. 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the signal example<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of invariableness of justice<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our glorious founder<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Heracles gave us,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Son loved of Zeus his father&mdash;for he sinn'd,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant</i>. 2.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the strand of Eub&oelig;a,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the promontory of Cen&aelig;um,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His painful, solemn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Punishment witness'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Beheld his expiation&mdash;for he died.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>str</i>. 3.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O villages of &OElig;ta<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With hedges of the wild rose!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O pastures of the mountain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of short grass, beaded with dew,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Between the pine-woods and the cliffs!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O cliffs, left by the eagles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On that morn, when the smoke-cloud<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_429" id="Page_429">[429]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the oak-built, fiercely-burning pyre,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Up the precipices of Trachis,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Drove them screaming from their eyries!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A willing, a willing sacrifice on that day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ye witness'd, ye mountain lawns,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the shirt-wrapt, poison-blister'd Hero<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ascended, with undaunted heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Living, his own funeral-pile,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And stood, shouting for a fiery torch;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the kind, chance-arrived Wanderer,<a name="FNanchor_30_32" id="FNanchor_30_32"></a><a href="#Footnote_30_32" class="fnanchor">[30]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The inheritor of the bow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Coming swiftly through the sad Trachinians,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Put the torch to the pile.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That the flame tower'd on high to the Heaven;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bearing with it, to Olympus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the side of Hebe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To immortal delight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The labour-released Hero.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat"><i>ant</i>. 3.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O heritage of Neleus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ill-kept by his infirm heirs!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O kingdom of Messen&ecirc;,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of rich soil, chosen by craft,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Possess'd in hatred, lost in blood!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O town, high Stenyclaros,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With new walls, which the victors<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the four-town'd, mountain-shadow'd Doris,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For their Heracles-issued princes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Built in strength against the vanquish'd!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Another, another sacrifice on this day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ye witness, ye new-built towers!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the white-robed, garland-crowned Monarch<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Approaches, with undoubting heart,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_430" id="Page_430">[430]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Living, his own sacrifice-block,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And stands, shouting for a slaughterous axe;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the stern, destiny-brought Stranger,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The inheritor of the realm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Coming swiftly through the jocund Dorians,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Drives the axe to its goal.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That the blood rushes in streams to the dust;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bearing with it, to Erinnys,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the Gods of Hades,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the dead unavenged,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fiercely-required Victim.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="rfloat">[<i>epode</i>.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Knowing he did it, unknowing pays for it.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unknowing, unknowing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thinking atoned-for<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Deeds unatonable,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thinking appeased<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gods unappeasable,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lo, the ill-fated one,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Standing for harbour<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Right at the harbour-mouth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Strikes with all sail set<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Full on the sharp-pointed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Needle of ruin!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i18">[<i>A</i> <span class="smcap">Messenger</span> <i>comes in</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Messenger</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O honour'd Queen, O faithful followers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of your dead master's line, I bring you news<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To make the gates of this long-mournful house<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Leap, and fly open of themselves for joy!<br /></span>
<span class="i16">[<i>noise and shouting heard.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hark how the shouting crowds tramp hitherward<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_431" id="Page_431">[431]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">With glad acclaim! Ere they forestall my news,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Accept it:&mdash;Polyphontes is no more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Is my son safe? that question bounds my care.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Messenger</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He is, and by the people hail'd for king.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The rest to me is little; yet, since that<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Must from some mouth be heard, relate it thou.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Messenger</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not little, if thou saw'st what love, what zeal,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At thy dead husband's name the people show.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For when this morning in the public square<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I took my stand, and saw the unarm'd crowds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of citizens in holiday attire,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Women and children intermix'd; and then,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Group'd around Zeus's altar, all in arms,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Serried and grim, the ring of Dorian lords&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I trembled for our prince and his attempt.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Silence and expectation held us all;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till presently the King came forth, in robe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of sacrifice, his guards clearing the way<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before him&mdash;at his side, the prince, thy son,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unarm'd and travel-soil'd, just as he was.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With him conferring the King slowly reach'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The altar in the middle of the square,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where, by the sacrificing minister,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The flower-dress'd victim stood&mdash;a milk-white bull,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_432" id="Page_432">[432]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swaying from side to side his massy head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With short impatient lowings. There he stopp'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And seem'd to muse awhile, then raised his eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To heaven, and laid his hand upon the steer,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And cried: <i>O Zeus, let what blood-guiltiness</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Yet stains our land be by this blood wash'd out,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>And grant henceforth to the Messenians peace!</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">That moment, while with upturn'd eyes he pray'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The prince snatch'd from the sacrificer's hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The axe, and on the forehead of the King,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where twines the chaplet, dealt a mighty blow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which fell'd him to the earth, and o'er him stood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And shouted: <i>Since by thee defilement came,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>What blood so meet as thine to wash it out?</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>What hand to strike thee meet as mine, the hand</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Of &AElig;pytus, thy murder'd master's son?</i>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, gazing at him from the ground, the King....<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Is it, then, thou?</i> he murmur'd; and with that,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He bow'd his head, and deeply groan'd, and died.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till then we all seem'd stone, but then a cry<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Broke from the Dorian lords; forward they rush'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To circle the prince round&mdash;when suddenly<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Laias in arms sprang to his nephew's side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crying: <i>O ye Messenians, will ye leave</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The son to perish as ye left the sire?</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And from that moment I saw nothing clear;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For from all sides a deluge, as it seem'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Burst o'er the altar and the Dorian lords,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of holiday-clad citizens transform'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To armed warriors;&mdash;I heard vengeful cries,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I heard the clash of weapons; then I saw<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Dorians lying dead, thy son hail'd king.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, truly, one who sees, what seem'd so strong,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_433" id="Page_433">[433]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The power of this tyrant and his lords,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Melt like a passing smoke, a nightly dream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At one bold word, one enterprising blow&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Might ask, why we endured their yoke so long;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But that we know how every perilous feat<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of daring, easy as it seems when done,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is easy at no moment but the right.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou speakest well; but here, to give our eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Authentic proof of what thou tell'st our ears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The conquerors, with the King's dead body, come.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6">[<span class="smcap">&AElig;pytus</span>, <span class="smcap">Laias</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Arcas</span> <i>come in with the dead</i><br /></span>
<span class="i8"><i>body of</i> <span class="smcap">Polyphontes</span>, <i>followed by a crowd of the</i><br /></span>
<span class="i8"><span class="smcap">Messenians</span>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Laias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sister, from this day forth thou art no more<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The widow of a husband unavenged,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The anxious mother of an exiled son.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thine enemy is slain, thy son is king!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rejoice with us! and trust me, he who wish'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Welfare to the Messenian state, and calm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Could find no way to found them sure as this.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Mother, all these approve me; but if thou<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Approve not too, I have but half my joy.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Merope</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O &AElig;pytus, my son, behold, behold<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This iron man, my enemy and thine,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_434" id="Page_434">[434]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">This politic sovereign, lying at our feet,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With blood-bespatter'd robes, and chaplet shorn!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Inscrutable as ever, see, it keeps<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Its sombre aspect of majestic care,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of solitary thought, unshared resolve,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even in death, that countenance austere!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So look'd he, when to Stenyclaros first,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A new-made wife, I from Arcadia came,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And found him at my husband's side, his friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His kinsman, his right hand in peace and war,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unsparing in his service of his toil,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His blood&mdash;to me, for I confess it, kind;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So look'd he in that dreadful day of death;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So, when he pleaded for our league but now.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What meantest thou, O Polyphontes, what<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Desired'st thou, what truly spurr'd thee on?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was policy of state, the ascendency<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the Heracleidan conquerors, as thou said'st,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Indeed thy lifelong passion and sole aim?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or did'st thou but, as cautious schemers use,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cloak thine ambition with these specious words?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know not: just, in either case, the stroke<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which laid thee low, for blood requires blood;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But yet, not knowing this, I triumph not<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over thy corpse&mdash;triumph not, neither mourn,&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For I find worth in thee, and badness too.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What mood of spirit, therefore, shall we call<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The true one of a man&mdash;what way of life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His fix'd condition and perpetual walk?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">None, since a twofold colour reigns in all.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou, my son, study to make prevail<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One colour in thy life, the hue of truth;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That justice, that sage order, not alone<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_435" id="Page_435">[435]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Natural vengeance, may maintain thine act,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And make it stand indeed the will of Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy father's passion was this people's ease,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This people's anarchy, thy foe's pretence.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As the chiefs rule, my son, the people are.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unhappy people, where the chiefs themselves<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are, like the mob, vicious and ignorant!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So rule, that even thine enemies may fail<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To find in thee a fault whereon to found,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of tyrannous harshness, or remissness weak&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So rule, that as thy father thou be loved!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So rule, that as his foe thou be obey'd!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Take these, my son, over thine enemy's corpse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy mother's prayers! and this prayer last of all:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That even in thy victory thou show,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mortal, the moderation of a man.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>&AElig;pytus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">O mother, my best diligence shall be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In all by thy experience to be ruled<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where my own youth falls short! But, Laias, now,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">First work after such victory, let us go<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To render to my true Messenians thanks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the Gods grateful sacrifice; and then,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Assume the ensigns of my father's power.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>The Chorus</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Son of Cresphontes, past what perils<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Com'st thou, guided safe, to thy home!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What things daring! what enduring!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all this by the will of the Gods.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_436" id="Page_436">[436]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="EMPEDOCLES_ON_ETNA" id="EMPEDOCLES_ON_ETNA"></a>EMPEDOCLES ON ETNA</h2>

<h3>A DRAMATIC POEM</h3>


<p class="fm3">PERSONS</p>

<div class="chlist"><span class="smcap">Empedocles.<br /></span>
<span class="smcap">Pausanias</span>, <i>a Physician</i>.<br />
<span class="smcap">Callicles</span>, <i>a young Harp-player</i>.
</div>

<p><i>The Scene of the Poem is on Mount Etna; at first in the forest region,
afterwards on the summit of the mountain</i>.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="ACT_I_SCENE_I" id="ACT_I_SCENE_I"></a>ACT I. SCENE I.</h2>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>Morning. A Pass in the forest region of Etna.</i></span>
</div></div>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><span class="smcap">Callicles</span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">(<i>Alone, resting on a rock by the path.</i>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The mules, I think, will not be here this hour;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They feel the cool wet turf under their feet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By the stream-side, after the dusty lanes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In which they have toil'd all night from Catana,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And scarcely will they budge a yard. O Pan,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How gracious is the mountain at this hour!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A thousand times have I been here alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or with the revellers from the mountain-towns,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But never on so fair a morn;&mdash;the sun<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is shining on the brilliant mountain-crests,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_437" id="Page_437">[437]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on the highest pines; but farther down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here in the valley, is in shade; the sward<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is dark, and on the stream the mist still hangs;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One sees one's footprints crush'd in the wet grass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One's breath curls in the air; and on these pines<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That climb from the stream's edge, the long grey tufts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which the goats love, are jewell'd thick with dew.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here will I stay till the slow litter comes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I have my harp too&mdash;that is well.&mdash;Apollo!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What mortal could be sick or sorry here?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know not in what mind Empedocles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose mules I follow'd, may be coming up,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But if, as most men say, he is half mad<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With exile, and with brooding on his wrongs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pausanias, his sage friend, who mounts with him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Could scarce have lighted on a lovelier cure.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mules must be below, far down. I hear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their tinkling bells, mix'd with the song of birds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rise faintly to me&mdash;now it stops!&mdash;Who's here?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pausanias! and on foot? alone?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i22">And thou, then?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I left thee supping with Peisianax,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With thy head full of wine, and thy hair crown'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Touching thy harp as the whim came on thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And praised and spoil'd by master and by guests<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Almost as much as the new dancing-girl.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why hast thou follow'd us?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Callicles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">The night was hot,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the feast past its prime; so we slipp'd out,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_438" id="Page_438">[438]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some of us, to the portico to breathe;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Peisianax, thou know'st, drinks late;&mdash;and then,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As I was lifting my soil'd garland off,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I saw the mules and litter in the court,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the litter sate Empedocles;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou, too, wast with him. Straightway I sped home;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I saddled my white mule, and all night long<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the cool lovely country follow'd you,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pass'd you a little since as morning dawn'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And have this hour sate by the torrent here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till the slow mules should climb in sight again.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And now?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i5">And now, back to the town with speed!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crouch in the wood first, till the mules have pass'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They do but halt, they will be here anon.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou must be viewless to Empedocles;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Save mine, he must not meet a human eye.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One of his moods is on him that thou know'st;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I think, thou wouldst not vex him.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Callicles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i22">No&mdash;and yet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I would fain stay, and help thee tend him. Once<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He knew me well, and would oft notice me;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And still, I know not how, he draws me to him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I could watch him with his proud sad face,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His flowing locks and gold-encircled brow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And kingly gait, for ever; such a spell<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In his severe looks, such a majesty<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As drew of old the people after him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Agrigentum and Olympia,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_439" id="Page_439">[439]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">When his star reign'd, before his banishment,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is potent still on me in his decline.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But oh! Pausanias, he is changed of late;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There is a settled trouble in his air<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Admits no momentary brightening now,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And when he comes among his friends at feasts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis as an orphan among prosperous boys.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou know'st of old he loved this harp of mine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When first he sojourn'd with Peisianax;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He is now always moody, and I fear him;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But I would serve him, soothe him, if I could,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dared one but try.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i15">Thou wast a kind child ever!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He loves thee, but he must not see thee now.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou hast indeed a rare touch on thy harp,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He loves that in thee, too;&mdash;there was a time<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(But that is pass'd), he would have paid thy strain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With music to have drawn the stars from heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He hath his harp and laurel with him still,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he has laid the use of music by,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all which might relax his settled gloom.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet thou may'st try thy playing, if thou wilt&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou must keep unseen; follow us on,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But at a distance! in these solitudes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In this clear mountain-air, a voice will rise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though from afar, distinctly; it may soothe him.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Play when we halt, and, when the evening comes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I must leave him (for his pleasure is<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To be left musing these soft nights alone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the high unfrequented mountain-spots),<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then watch him, for he ranges swift and far,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_440" id="Page_440">[440]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sometimes to Etna's top, and to the cone;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But hide thee in the rocks a great way down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And try thy noblest strains, my Callicles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With the sweet night to help thy harmony!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou wilt earn my thanks sure, and perhaps his.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Callicles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">More than a day and night, Pausanias,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of this fair summer-weather, on these hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would I bestow to help Empedocles.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That needs no thanks; one is far better here<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than in the broiling city in these heats.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But tell me, how hast them persuaded him<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In this his present fierce, man-hating mood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To bring thee out with him alone on Etna?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou hast heard all men speaking of Pantheia<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The woman who at Agrigentum lay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thirty long days in a cold trance of death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And whom Empedocles call'd back to life.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou art too young to note it, but his power<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Swells with the swelling evil of this time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And holds men mute to see where it will rise.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He could stay swift diseases in old days,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Chain madmen by the music of his lyre,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cleanse to sweet airs the breath of poisonous streams,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the mountain-chinks inter the winds.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This he could do of old; but now, since all<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clouds and grows daily worse in Sicily,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Since broils tear us in twain, since this new swarm<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of sophists has got empire in our schools<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_441" id="Page_441">[441]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where he was paramount, since he is banish'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lives a lonely man in triple gloom&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He grasps the very reins of life and death.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I ask'd him of Pantheia yesterday,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When we were gather'd with Peisianax,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he made answer, I should come at night<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On Etna here, and be alone with him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he would tell me, as his old, tried friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who still was faithful, what might profit me;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That is, the secret of this miracle.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Callicles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Bah! Thou a doctor! Thou art superstitious.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Simple Pausanias, 'twas no miracle!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pantheia, for I know her kinsmen well,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Was subject to these trances from a girl.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Empedocles would say so, did he deign;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he still lets the people, whom he scorns,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gape and cry <i>wizard</i> at him, if they list.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou, thou art no company for him!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou art as cross, as sour'd as himself!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou hast some wrong from thine own citizens,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then thy friend is banish'd, and on that,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Straightway thou fallest to arraign the times,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As if the sky was impious not to fall.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sophists are no enemies of his;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I hear, Gorgias, their chief, speaks nobly of him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As of his gifted master, and once friend.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He is too scornful, too high-wrought, too bitter.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis not the times, 'tis not the sophists vex him;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There is some root of suffering in himself,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some secret and unfollow'd vein of woe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which makes the time look black and sad to him.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_442" id="Page_442">[442]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pester him not in this his sombre mood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With questionings about an idle tale,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But lead him through the lovely mountain-paths,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And keep his mind from preying on itself,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And talk to him of things at hand and common,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not miracles! thou art a learned man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But credulous of fables as a girl.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And thou, a boy whose tongue outruns his knowledge,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And on whose lightness blame is thrown away.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Enough of this! I see the litter wind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Up by the torrent-side, under the pines.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I must rejoin Empedocles. Do thou<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crouch in the brushwood till the mules have pass'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then play thy kind part well. Farewell till night!<br /></span>
</div></div>


<h2>SCENE II</h2>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>Noon. A Glen on the highest skirts of the woody region
of Etna.</i></span>
</div></div>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><span class="smcap">Empedocles</span>&mdash;<span class="smcap">Pausanias</span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The noon is hot. When we have cross'd the stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We shall have left the woody tract, and come<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the open shoulder of the hill.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">See how the giant spires of yellow bloom<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the sun-loving gentian, in the heat,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are shining on those naked slopes like flame!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let us rest here; and now, Empedocles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pantheia's history!<br /></span>
<span class="i14">[<i>A harp-note below is heard.</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_443" id="Page_443">[443]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Empedocles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i13">Hark! what sound was that<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rose from below? If it were possible,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we were not so far from human haunt,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I should have said that some one touch'd a harp<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hark! there again!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i15">'Tis the boy Callicles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sweetest harp-player in Catana.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He is for ever coming on these hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In summer, to all country-festivals,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With a gay revelling band; he breaks from them<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sometimes, and wanders far among the glens.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But heed him not, he will not mount to us;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I spoke with him this morning. Once more, therefore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Instruct me of Pantheia's story, Master,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As I have pray'd thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Empedocles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i19">That? and to what end?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">It is enough that all men speak of it.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But I will also say, that when the Gods<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Visit us as they do with sign and plague,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To know those spells of thine which stay their hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were to live free from terror.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Empedocles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i16">Spells? Mistrust them!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_444" id="Page_444">[444]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mind is the spell which governs earth and heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man has a mind with which to plan his safety;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Know that, and help thyself!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i18">But thine own words?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"The wit and counsel of man was never clear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Troubles confound the little wit he has."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mind is a light which the Gods mock us with,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To lead those false who trust it.<br /></span>
<span class="i20">[<i>The harp sounds again.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Empedocles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">Hist! once more!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Listen, Pausanias!&mdash;Ay, 'tis Callicles;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I know these notes among a thousand. Hark!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Callicles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">(<i>Sings unseen, from below</i>).<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The track winds down to the clear stream,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To cross the sparkling shallows; there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The cattle love to gather, on their way<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the high mountain-pastures, and to stay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till the rough cow-herds drive them past,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Knee-deep in the cool ford; for 'tis the last<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of all the woody, high, well-water'd dells<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On Etna; and the beam<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of noon is broken there by chestnut-boughs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down its steep verdant sides; the air<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is freshen'd by the leaping stream, which throws<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Eternal showers of spray on the moss'd roots<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_445" id="Page_445">[445]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of trees, and veins of turf, and long dark shoots<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of ivy-plants, and fragrant hanging bells<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of hyacinths, and on late anemonies,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That muffle its wet banks; but glade,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And stream, and sward, and chestnut-trees,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">End here; Etna beyond, in the broad glare<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the hot noon, without a shade,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Slope behind slope, up to the peak, lies bare;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The peak, round which the white clouds play.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In such a glen, on such a day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On Pelion, on the grassy ground,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Chiron, the aged Centaur lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The young Achilles standing by.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Centaur taught him to explore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mountains; where the glens are dry<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the tired Centaurs come to rest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And where the soaking springs abound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the straight ashes grow for spears,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And where the hill-goats come to feed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the sea-eagles build their nest.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He show'd him Phthia far away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And said: O boy, I taught this lore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Peleus, in long distant years!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He told him of the Gods, the stars,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The tides;&mdash;and then of mortal wars,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And of the life which heroes lead<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before they reach the Elysian place<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And rest in the immortal mead;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all the wisdom of his race.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>The music below ceases, and</i> <span class="smcap">Empedocles</span> <i>speaks, accompanying</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>himself in a solemn manner on his harp.</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_446" id="Page_446">[446]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The out-spread world to span<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A cord the Gods first slung,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then the soul of man<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There, like a mirror, hung,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bade the winds through space impel the gusty toy<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Hither and thither spins<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The wind-borne, mirroring soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A thousand glimpses wins,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And never sees a whole;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Looks once, and drives elsewhere, and leaves its last employ.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The Gods laugh in their sleeve<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To watch man doubt and fear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who knows not what to believe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Since he sees nothing clear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And dares stamp nothing false where he finds nothing sure.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Is this, Pausanias, so?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And can our souls not strive,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But with the winds must go,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hurry where they drive?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is fate indeed so strong, man's strength indeed so poor?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I will not judge. That man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Howbeit, I judge as lost,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose mind allows a plan,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which would degrade it most;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he treats doubt the best who tries to see least ill.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Be not, then, fear's blind slave!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou art my friend; to thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All knowledge that I have,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All skill I wield, are free.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ask not the latest news of the last miracle,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_447" id="Page_447">[447]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ask not what days and nights<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In trance Pantheia lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But ask how thou such sights<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May'st see without dismay;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ask what most helps when known, thou son of Anchitus!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What? hate, and awe, and shame<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fill thee to see our time;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou feelest thy soul's frame<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shaken and out of chime?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What? life and chance go hard with thee too, as with us;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thy citizens, 'tis said,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Envy thee and oppress,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy goodness no men aid,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All strive to make it less;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tyranny, pride, and lust, fill Sicily's abodes;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Heaven is with earth at strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Signs make thy soul afraid,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The dead return to life,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rivers are dried, winds stay'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Scarce can one think in calm, so threatening are the Gods;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And we feel, day and night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The burden of ourselves&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Well, then, the wiser wight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In his own bosom delves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And asks what ails him so, and gets what cure he can.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The sophist sneers: Fool, take<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy pleasure, right or wrong.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The pious wail: Forsake<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A world these sophists throng.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be neither saint nor sophist-led, but be a man!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_448" id="Page_448">[448]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">These hundred doctors try<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To preach thee to their school.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We have the truth! they cry;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And yet their oracle,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Trumpet it as they will, is but the same as thine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Once read thy own breast right,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou hast done with fears;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man gets no other light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Search he a thousand years.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sink in thyself! there ask what ails thee, at that shrine!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What makes thee struggle and rave?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why are men ill at ease?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis that the lot they have<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fails their own will to please;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For man would make no murmuring, were his will obey'd.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And why is it, that still<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man with his lot thus fights?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">'Tis that he makes this <i>will</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The measure of his <i>rights</i>,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And believes Nature outraged if his will's gainsaid.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Couldst thou, Pausanias, learn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How deep a fault is this;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Couldst thou but once discern<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou hast no <i>right</i> to bliss,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No title from the Gods to welfare and repose;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then thou wouldst look less mazed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whene'er of bliss debarr'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor think the Gods were crazed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When thy own lot went hard.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But we are all the same&mdash;the fools of our own woes!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_449" id="Page_449">[449]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">For, from the first faint morn<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of life, the thirst for bliss<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Deep in man's heart is born;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, sceptic as he is,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He fails not to judge clear if this be quench'd or no.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Nor is the thirst to blame.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man errs not that he deems<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His welfare his true aim,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He errs because he dreams<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The world does but exist that welfare to bestow.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We mortals are no kings<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For each of whom to sway<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A new-made world up-springs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Meant merely for his play;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No, we are strangers here; the world is from of old.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In vain our pent wills fret,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And would the world subdue.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Limits we did not set<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Condition all we do;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Born into life we are, and life must be our mould.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Born into life!&mdash;man grows<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forth from his parents' stem,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And blends their bloods, as those<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of theirs are blent in them;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So each new man strikes root into a far fore-time.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Born into life!&mdash;we bring<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A bias with us here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, when here, each new thing<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Affects us we come near;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To tunes we did not call our being must keep chime.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_450" id="Page_450">[450]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Born into life!&mdash;in vain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Opinions, those or these,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unalter'd to retain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The obstinate mind decrees;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Experience, like a sea, soaks all-effacing in.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Born into life!&mdash;who lists<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May what is false hold dear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And for himself make mists<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through which to see less clear;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The world is what it is, for all our dust and din.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Born into life!&mdash;'tis we,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And not the world, are new;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our cry for bliss, our plea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Others have urged it too&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our wants have all been felt, our errors made before.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No eye could be too sound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To observe a world so vast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No patience too profound<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To sort what's here amass'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How man may here best live no care too great to explore.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But we&mdash;as some rude guest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would change, where'er he roam,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The manners there profess'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To those he brings from home&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We mark not the world's course, but would have <i>it</i> take <i>ours</i>.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The world's course proves the terms<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On which man wins content;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Reason the proof confirms&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We spurn it, and invent<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A false course for the world, and for ourselves, false powers.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_451" id="Page_451">[451]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Riches we wish to get,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet remain spendthrifts still;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We would have health, and yet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still use our bodies ill;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bafflers of our own prayers, from youth to life's last scenes.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We would have inward peace,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet will not look within;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We would have misery cease,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet will not cease from sin;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We want all pleasant ends, but will use no harsh means;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We do not what we ought,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What we ought not, we do,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lean upon the thought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That chance will bring us through;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But our own acts, for good or ill, are mightier powers.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet, even when man forsakes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All sin,&mdash;is just, is pure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Abandons all which makes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His welfare insecure,&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Other existences there are, that clash with ours.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Like us, the lightning-fires<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Love to have scope and play;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The stream, like us, desires<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An unimpeded way;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like us, the Libyan wind delights to roam at large.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Streams will not curb their pride<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The just man not to entomb,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor lightnings go aside<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To give his virtues room;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor is that wind less rough which blows a good man's barge.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_452" id="Page_452">[452]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Nature, with equal mind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sees all her sons at play;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sees man control the wind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The wind sweep man away;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Allows the proudly-riding and the foundering bark.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And, lastly, though of ours<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No weakness spoil our lot,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though the non-human powers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Nature harm us not,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The ill deeds of other men make often <i>our</i> life dark.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What were the wise man's plan?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through this sharp, toil-set life,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To work as best he can,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And win what's won by strife.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But we an easier way to cheat our pains have found.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Scratch'd by a fall, with moans<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As children of weak age<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lend life to the dumb stones<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whereon to vent their rage,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bend their little fists, and rate the senseless ground;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So, loath to suffer mute,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We, peopling the void air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Make Gods to whom to impute<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The ills we ought to bear;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With God and Fate to rail at, suffering easily.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet grant&mdash;as sense long miss'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Things that are now perceived,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And much may still exist<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which is not yet believed&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Grant that the world were full of Gods we cannot see;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_453" id="Page_453">[453]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">All things the world which fill<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of but one stuff are spun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That we who rail are still,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With what we rail at, one;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One with the o'erlabour'd Power that through the breadth and length<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Of earth, and air, and sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In men, and plants, and stones,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hath toil perpetually,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And travails, pants, and moans;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fain would do all things well, but sometimes fails in strength.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And patiently exact<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This universal God<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alike to any act<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Proceeds at any nod,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And quietly declaims the cursings of himself.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">This is not what man hates,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet he can curse but this.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Harsh Gods and hostile Fates<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are dreams! this only <i>is</i>&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is everywhere; sustains the wise, the foolish elf.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Nor only, in the intent<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To attach blame elsewhere,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do we at will invent<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Stern Powers who make their care<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To embitter human life, malignant Deities;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But, next, we would reverse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The scheme ourselves have spun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And what we made to curse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We now would lean upon,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And feign kind Gods who perfect what man vainly tries.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_454" id="Page_454">[454]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Look, the world tempts our eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we would know it all!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We map the starry sky,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We mine this earthen ball,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We measure the sea-tides, we number the sea-sands;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We scrutinise the dates<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of long-past human things,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The bounds of effaced states,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The lines of deceased kings;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We search out dead men's words, and works of dead men's hands;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We shut our eyes, and muse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How our own minds are made,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What springs of thought they use,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">How righten'd, how betray'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And spend our wit to name what most employ unnamed.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But still, as we proceed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mass swells more and more<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of volumes yet to read,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of secrets yet to explore.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our hair grows grey, our eyes are dimm'd, our heat is tamed;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We rest our faculties,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thus address the Gods:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"True science if there is,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It stays in your abodes!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Man's measures cannot mete the immeasurable All.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"You only can take in<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The world's immense design.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our desperate search was sin,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which henceforth we resign,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sure only that your mind sees all things which befal."<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_455" id="Page_455">[455]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Fools! That in man's brief term<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He cannot all things view,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Affords no ground to affirm<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That there are Gods who do;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor does being weary prove that he has where to rest.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Again.&mdash;Our youthful blood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Claims rapture as its right;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The world, a rolling flood<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of newness and delight,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Draws in the enamour'd gazer to its shining breast;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Pleasure, to our hot grasp,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gives flowers, after flowers;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With passionate warmth we clasp<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hand after hand in ours;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Now do we soon perceive how fast our youth is spent.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">At once our eyes grow clear!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We see, in blank dismay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Year posting after year,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sense after sense decay;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our shivering heart is mined by secret discontent;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet still, in spite of truth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In spite of hopes entomb'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That longing of our youth<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Burns ever unconsumed,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still hungrier for delight as delights grow more rare.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We pause; we hush our heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thus address the Gods:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"The world hath fail'd to impart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The joy our youth forebodes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fail'd to fill up the void which in our breasts we bear.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_456" id="Page_456">[456]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"Changeful till now, we still<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Look'd on to something new;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let us, with changeless will,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Henceforth look on to you,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To find with you the joy we in vain here require!"<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Fools! That so often here<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Happiness mock'd our prayer,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I think, might make us fear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A like event elsewhere;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Make us, not fly to dreams, but moderate desire.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And yet, for those who know<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Themselves, who wisely take<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their way through life, and bow<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To what they cannot break,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why should I say that life need yield but <i>moderate</i> bliss?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Shall we, with temper spoil'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Health sapp'd by living ill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And judgment all embroil'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By sadness and self-will,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall <i>we</i> judge what for man is not true bliss or is?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Is it so small a thing<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To have enjoy'd the sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To have lived light in the spring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To have loved, to have thought, to have done;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To have advanced true friends, and beat down baffling foes&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That we must feign a bliss<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of doubtful future date,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, while we dream on this,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lose all our present state,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And relegate to worlds yet distant our repose?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_457" id="Page_457">[457]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not much, I know, you prize<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What pleasures may be had,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who look on life with eyes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Estranged, like mine, and sad;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And yet the village-churl feels the truth more than you,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Who's loath to leave this life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which to him little yields&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His hard-task'd sunburnt wife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His often-labour'd fields,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The boors with whom he talk'd, the country-spots he knew.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But thou, because thou hear'st<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Men scoff at Heaven and Fate,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because the Gods thou fear'st<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fail to make blest thy state,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tremblest, and wilt not dare to trust the joys there are!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I say: Fear not! Life still<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Leaves human effort scope.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, since life teems with ill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nurse no extravagant hope:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because thou must not dream, thou need'st not then despair!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>A long pause. At the end of it the notes of a harp</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>below are again heard, and</i> <span class="smcap">Callicles</span> <i>sings:&mdash;</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Far, far from here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Adriatic breaks in a warm bay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Among the green Illyrian hills; and there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sunshine in the happy glens is fair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And by the sea, and in the brakes.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The grass is cool, the sea-side air<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Buoyant and fresh, the mountain flowers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More virginal and sweet than ours.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_458" id="Page_458">[458]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And there, they say, two bright and aged snakes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who once were Cadmus and Harmonia,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bask in the glens or on the warm sea-shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In breathless quiet, after all their ills;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor do they see their country, nor the place<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the Sphinx lived among the frowning hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor the unhappy palace of their race,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor Thebes, nor the Ismenus, any more.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">There those two live, far in the Illyrian brakes!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They had stay'd long enough to see,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In Thebes, the billow of calamity<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over their own dear children roll'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Curse upon curse, pang upon pang,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For years, they sitting helpless in their home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A grey old man and woman; yet of old<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Gods had to their marriage come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And at the banquet all the Muses sang.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Therefore they did not end their days<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In sight of blood; but were rapt, far away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To where the west-wind plays,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And murmurs of the Adriatic come<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To those untrodden mountain-lawns; and there<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Placed safely in changed forms, the pair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wholly forget their first sad life, and home,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all that Theban woe, and stray<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For ever through the glens, placid and dumb.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>Empedocles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That was my harp-player again!&mdash;where is he?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down by the stream?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_459" id="Page_459">[459]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8">Yes, Master, in the wood.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Empedocles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He ever loved the Theban story well!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the day wears. Go now, Pausanias,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For I must be alone. Leave me one mule;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Take down with thee the rest to Catana.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And for young Callicles, thank him from me;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tell him, I never fail'd to love his lyre&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he must follow me no more to-night.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou wilt return to-morrow to the city?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Empedocles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Either to-morrow or some other day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the sure revolutions of the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Good friend, I shall revisit Catana.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I have seen many cities in my time,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Till mine eyes ache with the long spectacle,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I shall doubtless see them all again;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou know'st me for a wanderer from of old.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Meanwhile, stay me not now. Farewell, Pausanias!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i12"><i>He departs on his way up the mountain.</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Pausanias</i> (<i>alone</i>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I dare not urge him further&mdash;he must go;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he is strangely wrought!&mdash;I will speed back<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And bring Peisianax to him from the city;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His counsel could once soothe him. But, Apollo!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_460" id="Page_460">[460]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">How his brow lighten'd as the music rose!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Callicles must wait here, and play to him;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I saw him through the chestnuts far below,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Just since, down at the stream.&mdash;Ho! Callicles!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i15"><i>He descends, calling.</i><br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="ACT_II" id="ACT_II"></a>ACT II</h2>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2"><i>Evening. The Summit of Etna.</i></span>
</div></div>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><span class="smcap">Empedocles</span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i16">Alone!&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On this charr'd, blacken'd, melancholy waste,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crown'd by the awful peak, Etna's great mouth.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Round which the sullen vapour rolls&mdash;alone!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pausanias is far hence, and that is well,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For I must henceforth speak no more with man<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He hath his lesson too, and that debt's paid;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the good, learned, friendly, quiet man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May bravelier front his life, and in himself<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Find henceforth energy and heart. But I&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The weary man, the banish'd citizen,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose banishment is not his greatest ill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose weariness no energy can reach,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And for whose hurt courage is not the cure&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What should I do with life and living more?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No, thou art come too late, Empedocles!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the world hath the day, and must break thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not thou the world. With men thou canst not live,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their thoughts, their ways, their wishes, are not thine;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And being lonely thou art miserable,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For something has impair'd thy spirit's strength,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_461" id="Page_461">[461]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And dried its self-sufficing fount of joy.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou canst not live with men nor with thyself&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O sage! O sage!&mdash;Take then the one way left;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And turn thee to the elements, thy friends,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy well-tried friends, thy willing ministers,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And say: Ye helpers, hear Empedocles,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who asks this final service at your hands!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before the sophist-brood hath overlaid<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The last spark of man's consciousness with words&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ere quite the being of man, ere quite the world<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be disarray'd of their divinity&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Before the soul lose all her solemn joys,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And awe be dead, and hope impossible,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the soul's deep eternal night come on&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Receive me, hide me, quench me, take me home!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>He advances to the edge of the crater. Smoke</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>and fire break forth with a loud noise, and</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><span class="smcap">Callicles</span> <i>is heard below singing:&mdash;</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The lyre's voice is lovely everywhere;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the court of Gods, in the city of men,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the lonely rock-strewn mountain-glen,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the still mountain air.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Only to Typho it sounds hatefully;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Typho only, the rebel o'erthrown,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through whose heart Etna drives her roots of stone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To imbed them in the sea.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Wherefore dost thou groan so loud?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wherefore do thy nostrils flash,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the dark night, suddenly,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Typho, such red jets of flame?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is thy tortured heart still proud?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_462" id="Page_462">[462]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is thy fire-scathed arm still rash?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Still alert thy stone-crush'd frame?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Doth thy fierce soul still deplore<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thine ancient rout by the Cilician hills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that curst treachery on the Mount of Gore?<a name="FNanchor_31_33" id="FNanchor_31_33"></a><a href="#Footnote_31_33" class="fnanchor">[31]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Do thy bloodshot eyes still weep<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fight which crown'd thine ills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy last mischance on this Sicilian deep?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hast thou sworn, in thy sad lair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where erst the strong sea-currents suck'd thee down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Never to cease to writhe, and try to rest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Letting the sea-stream wander through thy hair?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That thy groans, like thunder prest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Begin to roll, and almost drown<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sweet notes whose lulling spell<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Gods and the race of mortals love so well,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When through thy caves thou hearest music swell?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But an awful pleasure bland<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Spreading o'er the Thunderer's face,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When the sound climbs near his seat,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Olympian council sees;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As he lets his lax right hand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which the lightnings doth embrace,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sink upon his mighty knees.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the eagle, at the beck<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the appeasing, gracious harmony,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Droops all his sheeny, brown, deep-feather'd neck,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nestling nearer to Jove's feet;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While o'er his sovran eye<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The curtains of the blue films slowly meet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the white Olympus-peaks<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rosily brighten, and the soothed Gods smile<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_463" id="Page_463">[463]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">At one another from their golden chairs,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And no one round the charmed circle speaks.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Only the loved Hebe bears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The cup about, whose draughts beguile<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pain and care, with a dark store<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of fresh-pull'd violets wreathed and nodding o'er;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And her flush'd feet glow on the marble floor.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Empedocles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He fables, yet speaks truth!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The brave, impetuous heart yields everywhere<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the subtle, contriving head;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Great qualities are trodden down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And littleness united<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is become invincible.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">These rumblings are not Typho's groans, I know!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">These angry smoke-bursts<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are not the passionate breath<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the mountain-crush'd, tortured, intractable Titan king&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But over all the world<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What suffering is there not seen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of plainness oppress'd by cunning,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As the well-counsell'd Zeus oppress'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That self-helping son of earth!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What anguish of greatness,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rail'd and hunted from the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Because its simplicity rebukes<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This envious, miserable age!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I am weary of it.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Lie there, ye ensigns<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of my unloved pre&euml;minence<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_464" id="Page_464">[464]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">In an age like this!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Among a people of children,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who throng'd me in their cities,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who worshipp'd me in their houses,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And ask'd, not wisdom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But drugs to charm with,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But spells to mutter&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All the fool's-armoury of magic!&mdash;Lie there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My golden circlet,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My purple robe!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Callicles</i> (<i>from below</i>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">As the sky-brightening south-wind clears the day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And makes the mass'd clouds roll,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The music of the lyre blows away<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The clouds which wrap the soul.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Oh! that Fate had let me see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That triumph of the sweet persuasive lyre,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That famous, final victory,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When jealous Pan with Marsyas did conspire;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">When, from far Parnassus' side,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Young Apollo, all the pride<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the Phrygian flutes to tame,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the Phrygian highlands came;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the long green reed-beds sway<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the rippled waters grey<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of that solitary lake<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where M&aelig;ander's springs are born;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whence the ridged pine-wooded roots<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Messogis westward break,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mounting westward, high and higher.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There was held the famous strife;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_465" id="Page_465">[465]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">There the Phrygian brought his flutes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Apollo brought his lyre;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, when now the westering sun<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Touch'd the hills, the strife was done,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the attentive Muses said:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Marsyas, thou art vanquished!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then Apollo's minister<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hang'd upon a branching fir<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Marsyas, that unhappy Faun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And began to whet his knife.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the M&aelig;nads, who were there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Left their friend, and with robes flowing<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the wind, and loose dark hair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er their polish'd bosoms blowing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Each her ribbon'd tambourine<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flinging on the mountain-sod,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With a lovely frighten'd mien<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Came about the youthful God.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he turn'd his beauteous face<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Haughtily another way,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From the grassy sun-warm'd place<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where in proud repose he lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With one arm over his head,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Watching how the whetting sped.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But aloof, on the lake-strand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Did the young Olympus stand,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Weeping at his master's end;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For the Faun had been his friend.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For he taught him how to sing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he taught him flute-playing.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Many a morning had they gone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To the glimmering mountain-lakes,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_466" id="Page_466">[466]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And had torn up by the roots<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The tall crested water-reeds<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With long plumes and soft brown seeds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And had carved them into flutes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sitting on a tabled stone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where the shoreward ripple breaks.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he taught him how to please<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The red-snooded Phrygian girls,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whom the summer evening sees<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Flashing in the dance's whirls<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Underneath the starlit trees<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the mountain-villages.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Therefore now Olympus stands,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At his master's piteous cries<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pressing fast with both his hands<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His white garment to his eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not to see Apollo's scorn;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ah, poor Faun, poor Faun! ah, poor Faun!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Empedocles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And lie thou there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My laurel bough!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Scornful Apollo's ensign, lie thou there!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though thou hast been my shade in the world's heat&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though I have loved thee, lived in honouring thee&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet lie thou there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My laurel bough!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I am weary of thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I am weary of the solitude<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where he who bears thee must abide&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the rocks of Parnassus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the rocks of Delphi,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_467" id="Page_467">[467]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of the moonlit peaks, and the caves.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou guardest them, Apollo!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the grave of the slain Pytho,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though young, intolerably severe!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou keepest aloof the profane,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But the solitude oppresses thy votary!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The jars of men reach him not in thy valley&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But can life reach him?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou fencest him from the multitude&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who will fence him from himself?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He hears nothing but the cry of the torrents,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the beating of his own heart.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The air is thin, the veins swell,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The temples tighten and throb there&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Air! air!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Take thy bough, set me free from my solitude;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I have been enough alone!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Where shall thy votary fly then? back to men?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But they will gladly welcome him once more,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And help him to unbend his too tense thought,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And rid him of the presence of himself,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And keep their friendly chatter at his ear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And haunt him, till the absence from himself,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That other torment, grow unbearable;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he will fly to solitude again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he will find its air too keen for him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And so change back; and many thousand times<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Be miserably bandied to and fro<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like a sea-wave, betwixt the world and thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou young, implacable God! and only death<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Can cut his oscillations short, and so<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bring him to poise. There is no other way.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_468" id="Page_468">[468]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And yet what days were those, Parmenides!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When we were young, when we could number friends<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In all the Italian cities like ourselves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When with elated hearts we join'd your train.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ye Sun-born Virgins! on the road of truth.<a name="FNanchor_32_34" id="FNanchor_32_34"></a><a href="#Footnote_32_34" class="fnanchor">[32]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then we could still enjoy, then neither thought<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor outward things were closed and dead to us;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But we received the shock of mighty thoughts<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On simple minds with a pure natural joy;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And if the sacred load oppress'd our brain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We had the power to feel the pressure eased,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The brow unbound, the thoughts flow free again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the delightful commerce of the world.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We had not lost our balance then, nor grown<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thought's slaves, and dead to every natural joy.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The smallest thing could give us pleasure then&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sports of the country-people,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A flute-note from the woods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sunset over the sea;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seed-time and harvest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The reapers in the corn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The vinedresser in his vineyard,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The village-girl at her wheel.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Fulness of life and power of feeling, ye<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are for the happy, for the souls at ease,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who dwell on a firm basis of content!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he, who has outlived his prosperous days&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But he, whose youth fell on a different world<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From that on which his exiled age is thrown&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose mind was fed on other food, was train'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By other rules than are in vogue to-day&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose habit of thought is fix'd, who will not change,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_469" id="Page_469">[469]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, in a world he loves not, must subsist<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In ceaseless opposition, be the guard<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of his own breast, fetter'd to what he guards,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That the world win no mastery over him&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who has no friend, no fellow left, not one;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who has no minute's breathing space allow'd<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To nurse his dwindling faculty of joy&mdash;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Joy and the outward world must die to him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As they are dead to me.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>A long pause, during which</i> <span class="smcap">Empedocles</span> <i>remains</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>motionless, plunged in thought. The night deepens.</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>He moves forward and gazes round him, and</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>proceeds</i>:&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And you, ye stars,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who slowly begin to marshal,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As of old, in the fields of heaven,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Your distant, melancholy lines!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Have you, too, survived yourselves?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are you, too, what I fear to become?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">You, too, once lived;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">You too moved joyfully<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Among august companions,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In an older world, peopled by Gods,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In a mightier order,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The radiant, rejoicing, intelligent Sons of Heaven.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But now, ye kindle<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Your lonely, cold-shining lights,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unwilling lingerers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the heavenly wilderness,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For a younger, ignoble world;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And renew, by necessity,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Night after night your courses,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_470" id="Page_470">[470]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">In echoing, unnear'd silence,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Above a race you know not&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Uncaring and undelighted,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Without friend and without home;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Weary like us, though not<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Weary with our weariness.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">No, no, ye stars! there is no death with you,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">No languor, no decay! languor and death,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They are with me, not you! ye are alive&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ye, and the pure dark ether where ye ride<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Brilliant above me! And thou, fiery world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That sapp'st the vitals of this terrible mount<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon whose charr'd and quaking crust I stand&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou, too, brimmest with life!&mdash;the sea of cloud,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That heaves its white and billowy vapours up<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To moat this isle of ashes from the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lives; and that other fainter sea, far down,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O'er whose lit floor a road of moonbeams leads<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To Etna's Lipar&euml;an sister-fires<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the long dusky line of Italy&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That mild and luminous floor of waters lives,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With held-in joy swelling its heart; I only,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whose spring of hope is dried, whose spirit has fail'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I, who have not, like these, in solitude<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Maintain'd courage and force, and in myself<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nursed an immortal vigour&mdash;I alone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Am dead to life and joy, therefore I read<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In all things my own deadness.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>A long silence. He continues</i>:&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Oh, that I could glow like this mountain!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oh, that my heart bounded with the swell of the sea!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_471" id="Page_471">[471]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oh, that my soul were full of light as the stars!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Oh, that it brooded over the world like the air!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But no, this heart will glow no more; thou art<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A living man no more, Empedocles!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nothing but a devouring flame of thought&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But a naked, eternally restless mind!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20"><i>After a pause</i>:&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">To the elements it came from<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Everything will return&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our bodies to earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our blood to water,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Heat to fire,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Breath to air.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They were well born, they will be well entomb'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But mind?...<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And we might gladly share the fruitful stir<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down in our mother earth's miraculous womb;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Well would it be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With what roll'd of us in the stormy main;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We might have joy, blent with the all-bathing air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or with the nimble, radiant life of fire.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But mind, but thought&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If these have been the master part of us&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where will <i>they</i> find their parent element?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What will receive <i>them</i>, who will call <i>them</i> home?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But we shall still be in them, and they in us,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we shall be the strangers of the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And they will be our lords, as they are now;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And keep us prisoners of our consciousness,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And never let us clasp and feel the All<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But through their forms, and modes, and stifling veils.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_472" id="Page_472">[472]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we shall be unsatisfied as now;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we shall feel the agony of thirst,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The ineffable longing for the life of life<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Baffled for ever; and still thought and mind<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will hurry us with them on their homeless march,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the unallied unopening earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the unrecognising sea; while air<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will blow us fiercely back to sea and earth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fire repel us from its living waves.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And then we shall unwillingly return<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Back to this meadow of calamity,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This uncongenial place, this human life;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in our individual human state<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Go through the sad probation all again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To see if we will poise our life at last,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To see if we will now at last be true<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To our own only true, deep-buried selves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Being one with which we are one with the whole world;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or whether we will once more fall away<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into some bondage of the flesh or mind,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Some slough of sense, or some fantastic maze<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Forged by the imperious lonely thinking-power.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And each succeeding age in which we are born<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will have more peril for us than the last;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will goad our senses with a sharper spur,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will fret our minds to an intenser play,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Will make ourselves harder to be discern'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we shall struggle awhile, gasp and rebel&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we shall fly for refuge to past times,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their soul of unworn youth, their breath of greatness;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the reality will pluck us back,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Knead us in its hot hand, and change our nature<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we shall feel our powers of effort flag,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_473" id="Page_473">[473]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i0">And rally them for one last fight&mdash;and fail;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And we shall sink in the impossible strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And be astray for ever.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i20">Slave of sense<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I have in no wise been;&mdash;but slave of thought?...<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And who can say: I have been always free,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lived ever in the light of my own soul?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I cannot; I have lived in wrath and gloom,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fierce, disputatious, ever at war with man,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Far from my own soul, far from warmth and light.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But I have not grown easy in these bonds&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But I have not denied what bonds these were.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yea, I take myself to witness,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That I have loved no darkness,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sophisticated no truth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nursed no delusion,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Allow'd no fear!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And therefore, O ye elements! I know&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ye know it too&mdash;it hath been granted me<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not to die wholly, not to be all enslaved.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I feel it in this hour. The numbing cloud<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mounts off my soul; I feel it, I breathe free.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Is it but for a moment?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;Ah, boil up, ye vapours!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Leap and roar, thou sea of fire!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My soul glows to meet you.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ere it flag, ere the mists<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of despondency and gloom<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rush over it again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Receive me, save me!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i10">[<i>He plunges into the crater.</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_474" id="Page_474">[474]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i8"><i>Callicles</i><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">(<i>from below</i>)<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Through the black, rushing smoke-bursts,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thick breaks the red flame;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All Etna heaves fiercely<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her forest-clothed frame.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Not here, O Apollo!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are haunts meet for thee.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, where Helicon breaks down<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In cliff to the sea,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Where the moon-silver'd inlets<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Send far their light voice<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Up the still vale of Thisbe,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">O speed, and rejoice!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">On the sward at the cliff-top<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lie strewn the white flocks,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On the cliff-side the pigeons<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Roost deep in the rocks.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">In the moonlight the shepherds,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Soft lull'd by the rills,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lie wrapt in their blankets<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Asleep on the hills.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">&mdash;What forms are these coming<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So white through the gloom?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What garments out-glistening<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The gold-flower'd broom?<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_475" id="Page_475">[475]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">What sweet-breathing presence<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Out-perfumes the thyme?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What voices enrapture<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The night's balmy prime?&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">'Tis Apollo comes leading<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His choir, the Nine.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;The leader is fairest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But all are divine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">They are lost in the hollows!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They stream up again!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What seeks on this mountain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The glorified train?&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">They bathe on this mountain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In the spring by their road;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then on to Olympus,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their endless abode.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">&mdash;Whose praise do they mention?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of what is it told?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What will be for ever;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What was from of old.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">First hymn they the Father<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of all things; and then,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The rest of immortals,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The action of men.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The day in his hotness,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The strife with the palm;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The night in her silence,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The stars in their calm.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_476" id="Page_476">[476]</a></span><br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_477" id="Page_477">[477]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="LATER_POEMS" id="LATER_POEMS"></a>LATER POEMS</h2>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_478" id="Page_478">[478]</a></span></span>
</div></div>

<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_479" id="Page_479">[479]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="WESTMINSTER_ABBEY" id="WESTMINSTER_ABBEY"></a>WESTMINSTER ABBEY</h2>

<h3><span class="smcap">July</span> 25, 1881.</h3>

<h3>(<i>The Day of Burial, in the Abbey, of</i> <span class="smcap">Arthur Penrhyn
Stanley</span>, <i>Dean of Westminster.</i>)</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">What! for a term so scant<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Our shining visitant<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cheer'd us, and now is pass'd into the night?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Couldst thou no better keep, O Abbey old,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The boon thy dedication-sign foretold,<a name="FNanchor_33_35" id="FNanchor_33_35"></a><a href="#Footnote_33_35" class="fnanchor">[33]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The presence of that gracious inmate, light?&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">A child of light appear'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hither he came, late-born and long-desired,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And to men's hearts this ancient place endear'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What, is the happy glow so soon expired?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i3">&mdash;Rough was the winter eve;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Their craft the fishers leave,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And down over the Thames the darkness drew.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">One still lags last, and turns, and eyes the Pile<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Huge in the gloom, across in Thorney Isle,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">King Sebert's work, the wondrous Minster new.<br /></span>
<span class="i3">&mdash;'Tis Lambeth now, where then<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They moor'd their boats among the bulrush stems;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that new Minster in the matted fen<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The world-famed Abbey by the westering Thames.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_480" id="Page_480">[480]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">His mates are gone, and he<br /></span>
<span class="i4">For mist can scarcely see<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A strange wayfarer coming to his side&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who bade him loose his boat, and fix his oar,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And row him straightway to the further shore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wait while he did there a space abide.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The fisher awed obeys,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That voice had note so clear of sweet command;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through pouring tide he pulls, and drizzling haze,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And sets his freight ashore on Thorney strand.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">The Minster's outlined mass<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Rose dim from the morass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thitherward the stranger took his way.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lo, on a sudden all the Pile is bright!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nave, choir and transept glorified with light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While tongues of fire on coign and carving play!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And heavenly odours fair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come streaming with the floods of glory in,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And carols float along the happy air,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As if the reign of joy did now begin.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Then all again is dark;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And by the fisher's bark<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The unknown passenger returning stands.<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>O Saxon fisher! thou hast had with thee</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The fisher from the Lake of Galilee&mdash;</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">So saith he, blessing him with outspread hands;<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Then fades, but speaks the while:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>At dawn thou to King Sebert shalt relate</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>How his St. Peter's Church in Thorney Isle</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Peter, his friend, with light did consecrate.</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_481" id="Page_481">[481]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Twelve hundred years and more<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Along the holy floor<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pageants have pass'd, and tombs of mighty kings<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Efface the humbler graves of Sebert's line,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, as years sped, the minster-aisles divine<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Grew used to the approach of Glory's wings.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Arts came, and arms, and law,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And majesty, and sacred form and fear;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Only that primal guest the fisher saw,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Light, only light, was slow to reappear.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">The Saviour's happy light,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Wherein at first was dight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His boon of life and immortality,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In desert ice of subtleties was spent<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or drown'd in mists of childish wonderment,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fond fancies here, there false philosophy!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And harsh the temper grew<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of men with mind thus darken'd and astray;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And scarce the boon of life could struggle through,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For want of light which should the boon convey.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Yet in this latter time<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The promise of the prime<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seem'd to come true at last, O Abbey old!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It seem'd, a child of light did bring the dower<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Foreshown thee in thy consecration-hour,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in thy courts his shining freight unroll'd:<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Bright wits, and instincts sure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And goodness warm, and truth without alloy,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And temper sweet, and love of all things pure,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And joy in light, and power to spread the joy.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_482" id="Page_482">[482]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">And on that countenance bright<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Shone oft so high a light,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That to my mind there came how, long ago,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Lay on the hearth, amid a fiery ring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The charm'd babe of the Eleusinian king&mdash;<a name="FNanchor_34_36" id="FNanchor_34_36"></a><a href="#Footnote_34_36" class="fnanchor">[34]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">His nurse, the Mighty Mother, will'd it so.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Warm in her breast, by day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He slumber'd, and ambrosia balm'd the child;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But all night long amid the flames he lay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon the hearth, and play'd with them, and smiled.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">But once, at midnight deep,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">His mother woke from sleep,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And saw her babe amidst the fire, and scream'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A sigh the Goddess gave, and with a frown<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Pluck'd from the fire the child, and laid him down;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then raised her face, and glory round her stream'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The mourning-stole no more<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mantled her form, no more her head was bow'd;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But raiment of celestial sheen she wore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And beauty fill'd her, and she spake aloud:&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">"O ignorant race of man!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Achieve your good who can,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If your own hands the good begun undo?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had human cry not marr'd the work divine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Immortal had I made this boy of mine;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But now his head to death again is due<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And I have now no power<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Unto this pious household to repay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Their kindness shown me in my wandering hour."<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&mdash;She spake, and from the portal pass'd away.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_483" id="Page_483">[483]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">The Boy his nurse forgot,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">And bore a mortal lot.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Long since, his name is heard on earth no more.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In some chance battle on Cith&aelig;ron-side<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The nursling of the Mighty Mother died,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And went where all his fathers went before.<br /></span>
<span class="i3">&mdash;On thee too, in thy day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of childhood, Arthur! did some check have power,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That, radiant though thou wert, thou couldst but stay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bringer of heavenly light, a human hour?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Therefore our happy guest<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Knew care, and knew unrest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And weakness warn'd him, and he fear'd decline.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And in the grave he laid a cherish'd wife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And men ignoble harass'd him with strife,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And deadly airs his strength did undermine.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Then from his Abbey fades<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sound beloved of his victorious breath;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And light's fair nursling stupor first invades,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And next the crowning impotence of death.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">But hush! This mournful strain,<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Which would of death complain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The oracle forbade, not ill-inspired.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That Pair, whose head did plan, whose hands did forge<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Temple in the pure Parnassian gorge,<a name="FNanchor_35_37" id="FNanchor_35_37"></a><a href="#Footnote_35_37" class="fnanchor">[35]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Finish'd their work, and then a meed required.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">"Seven days," the God replied,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">"Live happy, then expect your perfect meed!"<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Quiet in sleep, the seventh night, they died.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Death, death was judged the boon supreme indeed.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_484" id="Page_484">[484]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">And truly he who here<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Hath run his bright career,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And served men nobly, and acceptance found,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And borne to light and right his witness high,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What could he better wish than then to die,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And wait the issue, sleeping underground?<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Why should he pray to range<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down the long age of truth that ripens slow;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And break his heart with all the baffling change,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all the tedious tossing to and fro?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">For this and that way swings<br /></span>
<span class="i4">The flux of mortal things,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though moving inly to one far-set goal.&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What had our Arthur gain'd, to stop and see,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">After light's term, a term of cecity,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A Church once large and then grown strait in soul?<br /></span>
<span class="i4">To live, and see arise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Alternating with wisdom's too short reign,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Folly revived, re-furbish'd sophistries,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And pullulating rites externe and vain?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">Ay me! 'Tis deaf, that ear<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Which joy'd my voice to hear;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet would I not disturb thee from thy tomb,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thus sleeping in thine Abbey's friendly shade,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the rough waves of life for ever laid!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I would not break thy rest, nor change thy doom.<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Even as my father, thou&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even as that loved, that well-recorded friend&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hast thy commission done; ye both may now<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wait for the leaven to work, the let to end.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_485" id="Page_485">[485]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i4">And thou, O Abbey grey!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Predestined to the ray<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By this dear guest over thy precinct shed&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fear not but that thy light once more shall burn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once more thine immemorial gleam return,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Though sunk be now this bright, this gracious head!<br /></span>
<span class="i4">Let but the light appear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thy transfigured walls be touch'd with flame&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our Arthur will again be present here,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Again from lip to lip will pass his name.<br /></span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="GEISTS_GRAVE" id="GEISTS_GRAVE"></a>GEIST'S GRAVE</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Four years!&mdash;and didst thou stay above<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The ground, which hides thee now, but four?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And all that life, and all that love,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were crowded, Geist! into no more?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Only four years those winning ways,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which make me for thy presence yearn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Call'd us to pet thee or to praise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dear little friend! at every turn?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That loving heart, that patient soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had they indeed no longer span,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To run their course, and reach their goal,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And read their homily to man?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That liquid, melancholy eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From whose pathetic, soul-fed springs<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Seem'd surging the Virgilian cry,<a name="FNanchor_B_2" id="FNanchor_B_2"></a><a href="#Footnote_B_2" class="fnanchor">[B]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sense of tears in mortal things<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_486" id="Page_486">[486]</a></span>&mdash;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">That steadfast, mournful strain, consoled<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By spirits gloriously gay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And temper of heroic mould&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What, was four years their whole short day?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yes, only four!&mdash;and not the course<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of all the centuries yet to come,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And not the infinite resource<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Nature, with her countless sum<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Of figures, with her fulness vast<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of new creation evermore,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Can ever quite repeat the past,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or just thy little self restore.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Stern law of every mortal lot!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Which man, proud man, finds hard to bear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And builds himself I know not what<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of second life I know not where.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But thou, when struck thine hour to go,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On us, who stood despondent by,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A meek last glance of love didst throw,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And humbly lay thee down to die.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet would we keep thee in our heart&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would fix our favourite on the scene,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor let thee utterly depart<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And be as if thou ne'er hadst been.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And so there rise these lines of verse<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On lips that rarely form them now;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While to each other we rehearse:<br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Such ways, such arts, such looks hadst thou!</i><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_487" id="Page_487">[487]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We stroke thy broad brown paws again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We bid thee to thy vacant chair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We greet thee by the window-pane,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We hear thy scuffle on the stair.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We see the flaps of thy large ears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Quick raised to ask which way we go;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Crossing the frozen lake, appears<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy small black figure on the snow!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Nor to us only art thou dear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who mourn thee in thine English home;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou hast thine absent master's tear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dropt by the far Australian foam.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thy memory lasts both here and there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou shall live as long as we.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And after that&mdash;thou dost not care!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In us was all the world to thee.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet, fondly zealous for thy fame,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even to a date beyond our own<br /></span>
<span class="i0">We strive to carry down thy name,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By mounded turf, and graven stone.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">We lay thee, close within our reach,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Here, where the grass is smooth and warm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Between the holly and the beech,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Where oft we watch'd thy couchant form,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Asleep, yet lending half an ear<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To travellers on the Portsmouth road;&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There build we thee, O guardian dear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mark'd with a stone, thy last abode!<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_488" id="Page_488">[488]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then some, who through this garden pass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">When we too, like thyself, are clay,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shall see thy grave upon the grass,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And stop before the stone, and say:<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>People who lived here long ago</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Did by this stone, it seems, intend</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>To name for future times to know</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The dachs-hound, Geist, their little friend.</i><br /></span>
</div></div>

<div class="footnotes"><h3>FOOTNOTE:</h3>
<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_B_2" id="Footnote_B_2"></a><a href="#FNanchor_B_2"><span class="label">[B]</span></a> <i>Sunt lacrim&aelig; rerum!</i></p></div>
</div>


<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h2><a name="POOR_MATTHIAS" id="POOR_MATTHIAS"></a>POOR MATTHIAS</h2>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Poor Matthias!&mdash;Found him lying<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fall'n beneath his perch and dying?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Found him stiff, you say, though warm&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All convulsed his little form?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poor canary! many a year<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Well he knew his mistress dear;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Now in vain you call his name,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Vainly raise his rigid frame,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Vainly warm him in your breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Vainly kiss his golden crest,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Smooth his ruffled plumage fine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Touch his trembling beak with wine.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">One more gasp&mdash;it is the end!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dead and mute our tiny friend!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Songster thou of many a year,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Now thy mistress brings thee here,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Says, it fits that I rehearse,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tribute due to thee, a verse,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Meed for daily song of yore<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Silent now for evermore.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_489" id="Page_489">[489]</a></span><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Poor Matthias! Wouldst thou have<br /></span>
<span class="i2">More than pity? claim'st a stave?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Friends more near us than a bird<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We dismiss'd without a word.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Rover, with the good brown head,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Great Atossa, they are dead;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dead, and neither prose nor rhyme<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tells the praises of their prime.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou didst know them old and grey,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Know them in their sad decay.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou hast seen Atossa sage<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sit for hours beside thy cage;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou wouldst chirp, thou foolish bird,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Flutter, chirp&mdash;she never stirr'd!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What were now these toys to her?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down she sank amid her fur;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Eyed thee with a soul resign'd&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And thou deemedst cats were kind!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Cruel, but composed and bland,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dumb, inscrutable and grand,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">So Tiberius might have sat,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Had Tiberius been a cat.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Rover died&mdash;Atossa too.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Less than they to us are you!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Nearer human were their powers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Closer knit their life with ours.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Hands had stroked them, which are cold,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Now for years, in churchyard mould;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Comrades of our past were they,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of that unreturning day.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Changed and aging, they and we<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dwelt, it seem'd, in sympathy.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_490" id="Page_490">[490]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Alway from their presence broke<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Somewhat which remembrance woke<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of the loved, the lost, the young&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yet they died, and died unsung.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Geist came next, our little friend;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Geist had verse to mourn his end.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Yes, but that enforcement strong<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Which compell'd for Geist a song&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All that gay courageous cheer,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">All that human pathos dear;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Soul-fed eyes with suffering worn,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pain heroically borne,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Faithful love in depth divine&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poor Matthias, were they thine?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Max and Kaiser we to-day<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Greet upon the lawn at play;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Max a dachshound without blot&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Kaiser should be, but is not.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Max, with shining yellow coat,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Prinking ears and dewlap throat&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Kaiser, with his collie face,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Penitent for want of race.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Which may be the first to die,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Vain to augur, they or I!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, as age comes on, I know,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poet's fire gets faint and low;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">If so be that travel they<br /></span>
<span class="i2">First the inevitable way,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Much I doubt if they shall have<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dirge from me to crown their grave.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yet, poor bird, thy tiny corse<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Moves me, somehow, to remorse;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_491" id="Page_491">[491]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Something haunts my conscience, brings<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sad, compunctious visitings.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Other favourites, dwelling here,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Open lived to us, and near;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Well we knew when they were glad,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Plain we saw if they were sad,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Joy'd with them when they were gay,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Soothed them in their last decay;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sympathy could feel and show<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Both in weal of theirs and woe.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Birds, companions more unknown,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Live beside us, but alone;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Finding not, do all they can,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Passage from their souls to man.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Kindness we bestow, and praise,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Laud their plumage, greet their lays;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Still, beneath their feather'd breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stirs a history unexpress'd.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Wishes there, and feelings strong,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Incommunicably throng;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What they want, we cannot guess,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fail to track their deep distress&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dull look on when death is nigh,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Note no change, and let them die.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Poor Matthias! couldst thou speak,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What a tale of thy last week!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Every morning did we pay<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stupid salutations gay,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Suited well to health, but how<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mocking, how incongruous now!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cake we offer'd, sugar, seed,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Never doubtful of thy need;<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_492" id="Page_492">[492]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Praised, perhaps, thy courteous eye,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Praised thy golden livery.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Gravely thou the while, poor dear!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Sat'st upon thy perch to hear,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fixing with a mute regard<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Us, thy human keepers hard,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Troubling, with our chatter vain,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ebb of life, and mortal pain&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Us, unable to divine<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Our companion's dying sign,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or o'erpass the severing sea<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Set betwixt ourselves and thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Till the sand thy feathers smirch<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fallen dying off thy perch!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Was it, as the Grecian sings,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Birds were born the first of things,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Before the sun, before the wind,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Before the gods, before mankind,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Airy, ante-mundane throng&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Witness their unworldly song!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Proof they give, too, primal powers,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of a prescience more than ours&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Teach us, while they come and go,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">When to sail, and when to sow.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Cuckoo calling from the hill,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Swallow skimming by the mill,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Swallows trooping in the sedge,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Starlings swirling from the hedge,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Mark the seasons, map our year,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As they show and disappear.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, with all this travail sage<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Brought from that anterior age,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_493" id="Page_493">[493]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Goes an unreversed decree<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Whereby strange are they and we;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Making want of theirs, and plan,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Indiscernible by man.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">No, away with tales like these<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stol'n from Aristophanes!<a name="FNanchor_36_38" id="FNanchor_36_38"></a><a href="#Footnote_36_38" class="fnanchor">[36]</a><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Does it, if we miss your mind,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Prove us so remote in kind?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Birds! we but repeat on you<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What amongst ourselves we do.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Somewhat more or somewhat less,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">'Tis the same unskilfulness.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What you feel, escapes our ken&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Know we more our fellow men?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Human suffering at our side,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ah, like yours is undescried!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Human longings, human fears,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Miss our eyes and miss our ears.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Little helping, wounding much,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dull of heart, and hard of touch,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Brother man's despairing sign<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who may trust us to divine?<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Who assure us, sundering powers<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stand not 'twixt his soul and ours?<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Poor Matthias! See, thy end<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What a lesson doth it lend!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">For that lesson thou shalt have,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dead canary bird, a stave!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Telling how, one stormy day,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Stress of gale and showers of spray<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Drove my daughter small and me<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Inland from the rocks and sea.<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_494" id="Page_494">[494]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Driv'n inshore, we follow down<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Ancient streets of Hastings town&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Slowly thread them&mdash;when behold,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">French canary-merchant old<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Shepherding his flock of gold<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In a low dim-lighted pen<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Scann'd of tramps and fishermen!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There a bird, high-coloured, fat,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Proud of port, though something squat&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Pursy, play'd-out Philistine&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Dazzled Nelly's youthful eyne.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But, far in, obscure, there stirr'd<br /></span>
<span class="i2">On his perch a sprightlier bird,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Courteous-eyed, erect and slim;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And I whisper'd: "Fix on <i>him</i>!"<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Home we brought him, young and fair,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Songs to trill in Surrey air.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here Matthias sang his fill,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Saw the cedars of Pains Hill;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Here he pour'd his little soul,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Heard the murmur of the Mole.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Eight in number now the years<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He hath pleased our eyes and ears;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Other favourites he hath known<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Go, and now himself is gone.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">&mdash;Fare thee well, companion dear!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Fare for ever well, nor fear,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Tiny though thou art, to stray<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Down the uncompanion'd way!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">We without thee, little friend,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Many years have not to spend;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">What are left, will hardly be<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Better than we spent with thee.</span>
</div></div>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_495" id="Page_495">[495]</a></span></span>
</div></div>
<h2><a name="KAISER_DEAD" id="KAISER_DEAD"></a>KAISER DEAD</h2>

<h3><i>April</i> 6, 1887.</h3>


<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">What, Kaiser dead? The heavy news<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Post-haste to Cobham calls the Muse,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From where in Farringford she brews<br /></span>
<span class="i6">The ode sublime,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Or with Pen-bryn's bold bard pursues<br /></span>
<span class="i6">A rival rhyme.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Kai's bracelet tail, Kai's busy feet,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Were known to all the village-street.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">"What, poor Kai dead?" say all I meet;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">"A loss indeed!"<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O for the croon pathetic, sweet,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Of Robin's reed!<a name="FNanchor_37_39" id="FNanchor_37_39"></a><a href="#Footnote_37_39" class="fnanchor">[37]</a><br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Six years ago I brought him down,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">A baby dog, from London town;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Round his small throat of black and brown<br /></span>
<span class="i6">A ribbon blue,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And vouch'd by glorious renown<br /></span>
<span class="i6">A dachshound true.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">His mother, most majestic dame,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Of blood-unmix'd, from Potsdam came;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And Kaiser's race we deem'd the same&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">No lineage higher.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And so he bore the imperial name.<br /></span>
<span class="i6">But ah, his sire!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Soon, soon the days conviction bring.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The collie hair, the collie swing,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_496" id="Page_496">[496]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">The tail's indomitable ring,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">The eye's unrest&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The case was clear; a mongrel thing<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Kai stood confest.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">But all those virtues, which commend<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The humbler sort who serve and tend,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Were thine in store, thou faithful friend.<br /></span>
<span class="i6">What sense, what cheer!<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To us, declining tow'rds our end,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">A mate how dear!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">For Max, thy brother-dog, began<br /></span>
<span class="i2">To flag, and feel his narrowing span.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And cold, besides, his blue blood ran,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Since, 'gainst the classes,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">He heard, of late, the Grand Old Man<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Incite the masses.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Yes, Max and we grew slow and sad;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">But Kai, a tireless shepherd-lad,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Teeming with plans, alert, and glad<br /></span>
<span class="i6">In work or play,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Like sunshine went and came, and bade<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Live out the day!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Still, still I see the figure smart&mdash;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Trophy in mouth, agog to start,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then, home return'd, once more depart;<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Or prest together<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Against thy mistress, loving heart,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">In winter weather.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">I see the tail, like bracelet twirl'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In moments of disgrace uncurl'd,<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_497" id="Page_497">[497]</a></span><br /></span>
<span class="i2">Then at a pardoning word re-furl'd,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">A conquering sign;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Crying, "Come on, and range the world,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">And never pine."<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Thine eye was bright, thy coat it shone;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thou hadst thine errands, off and on;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">In joy thy last morn flew; anon,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">A fit! All's over;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And thou art gone where Geist hath gone,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">And Toss, and Rover.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Poor Max, with downcast, reverent head,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Regards his brother's form outspread;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Full well Max knows the friend is dead<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Whose cordial talk,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And jokes in doggish language said,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Beguiled his walk.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">And Glory, stretch'd at Burwood gate,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Thy passing by doth vainly wait;<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And jealous Jock, thy only hate,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">The chiel from Skye,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Lets from his shaggy Highland pate<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Thy memory die.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i2">Well, fetch his graven collar fine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And rub the steel, and make it shine,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And leave it round thy neck to twine,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">Kai, in thy grave.<br /></span>
<span class="i2">There of thy master keep that sign,<br /></span>
<span class="i6">And this plain stave.<br /></span>
<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_498" id="Page_498">[498]</a><br /></span>
</div></div>

<p><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_499" id="Page_499">[499]</a></span><br /></p>
<p><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_500" id="Page_500">[500]</a></span></p>

<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<p><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_501" id="Page_501">[501]</a></span></p>
<h2><a name="NOTES" id="NOTES"></a>NOTES</h2>


<hr style="width: 65%;" />

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_1_3" id="Footnote_1_3"></a><a href="#FNanchor_1_3"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> NOTE 1, PAGE 2.
</p><p>
<i>Saw The Wide Prospect, and the Asian Fen.</i>
</p><p>
The name Europe (&#917;&#965;&#961;&#969;&#960;&#951;, <i>the wide prospect</i>) probably describes the
appearance of the European coast to the Greeks on the coast of Asia Minor
opposite. The name Asia, again, comes, it has been thought, from the
muddy fens of the rivers of Asia Minor, such as the Cayster or M&aelig;ander,
which struck the imagination of the Greeks living near them.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_2_4" id="Footnote_2_4"></a><a href="#FNanchor_2_4"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> NOTE 2, PAGE 8.
</p><p>
<i>Mycerinus.</i>
</p><p>
"After Chephren, Mycerinus, son of Cheops, reigned over Egypt. He
abhorred his father's courses, and judged his subjects more justly than any
of their kings had done.&mdash;To him there came an oracle from the city of
Buto, to the effect that he was to live but six years longer, and to die in
the seventh year from that time."&mdash;<span class="smcap">Herodotus</span>.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_3_5" id="Footnote_3_5"></a><a href="#FNanchor_3_5"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> NOTE 3, PAGE 38.
</p><p>
<i>Stagirius.</i>
</p><p>
Stagirius was a young monk to whom St. Chrysostom addressed three
books, and of whom those books give an account. They will be found in
the first volume of the Benedictine edition of St. Chrysostom's works.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_4_6" id="Footnote_4_6"></a><a href="#FNanchor_4_6"><span class="label">[4]</span></a> NOTE 4, PAGE 47.
</p><p>
<i>Horatian Echo.</i>
</p><p>
Written in 1847. Printed by permission of Mr. Arthur Galton, to
whom the Poem was given in 1886 for publication in <i>The Hobby Horse</i>.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_5_7" id="Footnote_5_7"></a><a href="#FNanchor_5_7"><span class="label">[5]</span></a> NOTE 5, PAGE 54.</p>
<p><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_502" id="Page_502">[502]</a></span></p><p>
<i>That wayside inn we left to-day.</i>
</p><p>
Those who have been long familiar with the English Lake-Country will
find no difficulty in recalling, from the description in the text, the roadside
inn at Wythburn on the descent from Dunmail Raise towards Keswick;
its sedentary landlord of thirty years ago, and the passage over the Wythburn
Fells to Watendlath.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_6_8" id="Footnote_6_8"></a><a href="#FNanchor_6_8"><span class="label">[6]</span></a> NOTE 6, PAGE 65.
</p><p>
<i>Sohrab and Rustum.</i>
</p><p>
The story of Sohrab and Rustum is told in Sir John Malcolm's <i>History
of Persia</i>, as follows:&mdash;
</p>
<div class="blockquot"><p>"The young Sohrab was the fruit of one of Rustum's early amours.
He had left his mother, and sought fame under the banners of Afrasiab,
whose armies he commanded, and soon obtained a renown beyond that of
all contemporary heroes but his father. He had carried death and dismay
into the ranks of the Persians, and had terrified the boldest warriors of that
country, before Rustum encountered him, which at last that hero resolved
to do, under a feigned name. They met three times. The first time they
parted by mutual consent, though Sohrab had the advantage; the second,
the youth obtained a victory, but granted life to his unknown father;
the third was fatal to Sohrab, who, when writhing in the pangs of death,
warned his conqueror to shun the vengeance that is inspired by parental
woes, and bade him dread the rage of the mighty Rustum, who must soon
learn that he had slain his son Sohrab. These words, we are told, were as
death to the aged hero; and when he recovered from a trance, he called in
despair for proofs of what Sohrab had said. The afflicted and dying youth
tore open his mail, and showed his father a seal which his mother had
placed on his arm when she discovered to him the secret of his birth, and
bade him seek his father. The sight of his own signet rendered Rustum
quite frantic; he cursed himself, attempting to put an end to his existence,
and was only prevented by the efforts of his expiring son. After Sohrab's
death, he burnt his tents and all his goods, and carried the corpse to
Seistan, where it was interred; the army of Turan was, agreeably to the
last request of Sohrab, permitted to cross the Oxus unmolested. To reconcile
us to the improbability of this tale, we are informed that Rustum could
have no idea his son was in existence. The mother of Sohrab had written
to him her child was a daughter, fearing to lose her darling infant if she
revealed the truth; and Rustum, as before stated, fought under a feigned
name, an usage not uncommon in the chivalrous combats of those days."</p></div>

<p><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_503" id="Page_503">[503]</a></span></p>
</div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_7_9" id="Footnote_7_9"></a><a href="#FNanchor_7_9"><span class="label">[7]</span></a> NOTE 7, PAGE 101.
</p><p>
<i>Balder Dead.</i>
</p>
<div class="blockquot"><p>"Balder the Good having been tormented with terrible dreams, indicating
that his life was in great peril, communicated them to the assembled &AElig;sir,
who resolved to conjure all things to avert from him the threatened danger.
Then Frigga exacted an oath from fire and water, from iron, and all other
metals, as well as from stones, earths, diseases, beasts, birds, poisons, and
creeping things, that none of them would do any harm to Balder. When
this was done, it became a favourite pastime of the &AElig;sir, at their meetings,
to get Balder to stand up and serve them as a mark, some hurling darts at
him, some stones, while others hewed at him with their swords and battle-axes,
for do what they would, none of them could harm him, and this was
regarded by all as a great honour shown to Balder. But when Loki beheld
the scene he was sorely vexed that Balder was not hurt. Assuming, therefore,
the shape of a woman, he went to Fensalir, the mansion of Frigga.
That goddess, when she saw the pretended woman, inquired of her if she
knew what the &AElig;sir were doing at their meetings. She replied, that they
were throwing darts and stones at Balder without being able to hurt him.
</p><p>
"'Ay,' said Frigga, 'neither metal nor wood can hurt Balder, for I
have exacted an oath from all of them.'
</p><p>
"'What!' exclaimed the woman, 'have all things sworn to spare
Balder?'
</p><p>
"'All things,' replied Frigga, 'except one little shrub that grows on
the eastern side of Valhalla, and is called Mistletoe, and which I thought
too young and feeble to crave an oath from.'
</p><p>
"As soon as Loki heard this he went away, and, resuming his natural
shape, cut off the mistletoe, and repaired to the place where the gods were
assembled. There he found H&ouml;dur standing apart, without partaking of
the sports, on account of his blindness, and going up to him said, 'Why
dost thou not also throw something at Balder?'
</p><p>
"'Because I am blind,' answered H&ouml;dur, 'and see not where Balder is,
and have, moreover, nothing to throw with.'
</p><p>
"'Come, then,' said Loki, 'do like the rest, and show honour to Balder
by throwing this twig at him, and I will direct thy arm toward the place
where he stands.'
</p><p>
"H&ouml;dur then took the mistletoe, and, under the guidance of Loki,
darted it at Balder, who, pierced through and through, fell down lifeless."&mdash;<i>Edda</i>.</p></div>

<p><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_504" id="Page_504">[504]</a></span></p>
</div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_8_10" id="Footnote_8_10"></a><a href="#FNanchor_8_10"><span class="label">[8]</span></a> NOTE 8, PAGE 138.
</p><p>
<i>Tristram and Iseult.</i>
</p>
<div class="blockquot"><p>"In the court of his uncle King Marc, the king of Cornwall, who at
this time resided at the castle of Tyntagel, Tristram became expert in all
knightly exercises.&mdash;The king of Ireland, at Tristram's solicitations, promised
to bestow his daughter Iseult in marriage on King Marc. The mother
of Iseult gave to her daughter's confidante a philtre, or love-potion, to be
administered on the night of her nuptials. Of this beverage Tristram and
Iseult, on their voyage to Cornwall, unfortunately partook. Its influence,
during the remainder of their lives, regulated the affections and destiny of
the lovers.&mdash;
</p><p>
"After the arrival of Tristram and Iseult in Cornwall, and the nuptials
of the latter with King Marc, a great part of the romance is occupied with
their contrivances to procure secret interviews.&mdash;Tristram, being forced to
leave Cornwall, on account of the displeasure of his uncle, repaired to
Brittany, where lived Iseult with the White Hands.&mdash;He married her&mdash;more
out of gratitude than love.&mdash;Afterwards he proceeded to the dominions
of Arthur, which became the theatre of unnumbered exploits.
</p><p>
"Tristram, subsequent to these events, returned to Brittany, and to his
long-neglected wife. There, being wounded and sick, he was soon reduced
to the lowest ebb. In this situation, he despatched a confidant to the queen
of Cornwall, to try if he could induce her to follow him to Brittany, etc."&mdash;<span class="smcap">Dunlop's</span>
<i>History of Fiction</i>.</p></div>
</div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_9_11" id="Footnote_9_11"></a><a href="#FNanchor_9_11"><span class="label">[9]</span></a> NOTE 9, PAGE 177.
</p><p>
<i>That son of Italy who tried to blow.</i>
</p><p>
Giacopone di Todi.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_10_12" id="Footnote_10_12"></a><a href="#FNanchor_10_12"><span class="label">[10]</span></a> NOTE 10, PAGE 183.
</p><p>
<i>Recalls the obscure opposer he outweigh'd.</i>
</p><p>
Gilbert de la Porr&eacute;e, at the Council of Rheims, in 1148.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_11_13" id="Footnote_11_13"></a><a href="#FNanchor_11_13"><span class="label">[11]</span></a> NOTE 11, PAGE 184.
</p><p>
<i>Of that unpitying Phrygian sect which cried.</i>
</p><p>
The Montanists.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_12_14" id="Footnote_12_14"></a><a href="#FNanchor_12_14"><span class="label">[12]</span></a> NOTE 12, PAGE 184.
</p><p>
<i>Monica.</i>
</p><p>
See St. Augustine's <i>Confessions</i>, book ix. chapter 11.</p>
<p><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_505" id="Page_505">[505]</a></span></p>
</div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_13_15" id="Footnote_13_15"></a><a href="#FNanchor_13_15"><span class="label">[13]</span></a> NOTE 13, PAGE 189.
</p><p>
<i>My Marguerite smiles upon the strand.</i>
</p><p>
See, among "Early Poems," the poem called <i>A Memory-Picture</i>.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_14_16" id="Footnote_14_16"></a><a href="#FNanchor_14_16"><span class="label">[14]</span></a> NOTE 14, PAGE 213.
</p><p>
<i>The Hunter of the Tanagr&aelig;an Field.</i>
</p><p>
Orion, the Wild Huntsman of Greek legend, and in this capacity
appearing in both earth and sky.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_15_17" id="Footnote_15_17"></a><a href="#FNanchor_15_17"><span class="label">[15]</span></a> NOTE 15, PAGE 214.
</p><p>
<i>O'er the sun-redden'd western straits.</i>
</p><p>
Erytheia, the legendary region around the Pillars of Hercules, probably
took its name from the redness of the West under which the Greeks saw it.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_16_18" id="Footnote_16_18"></a><a href="#FNanchor_16_18"><span class="label">[16]</span></a> NOTE 16, PAGE 273.
</p><p>
<i>The Scholar-Gipsy.</i>
</p>
<div class="blockquot"><p>"There was very lately a lad in the University of Oxford, who was by
his poverty forced to leave his studies there; and at last to join himself to
a company of vagabond gipsies. Among these extravagant people, by the
insinuating subtilty of his carriage, he quickly got so much of their love
and esteem as that they discovered to him their mystery. After he had
been a pretty while exercised in the trade, there chanced to ride by a
couple of scholars, who had formerly been of his acquaintance. They
quickly spied out their old friend among the gipsies; and he gave them an
account of the necessity which drove him to that kind of life, and told them
that the people he went with were not such impostors as they were taken
for, but that they had a traditional kind of learning among them, and could
do wonders by the power of imagination, their fancy binding that of others:
that himself had learned much of their art, and when he had compassed
the whole secret, he intended, he said, to leave their company, and give
the world an account of what he had learned."&mdash;<span class="smcap">Glanvil's</span> <i>Vanity of
Dogmatizing</i>, 1661.</p></div>
</div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_17_19" id="Footnote_17_19"></a><a href="#FNanchor_17_19"><span class="label">[17]</span></a> NOTE 17, PAGE 281.
</p><p>
<i>Thyrsis.</i>
</p><p>
Throughout this poem there is reference to the preceding piece, <i>The
Scholar-Gipsy</i>.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_18_20" id="Footnote_18_20"></a><a href="#FNanchor_18_20"><span class="label">[18]</span></a> NOTE 18, PAGE 287.
</p>
<p><span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_506" id="Page_506">[506]</a></span></p>
<p>
<i>Young Daphnis with his silver voice doth sing.</i>
</p>
<div class="blockquot"><p>Daphnis, the ideal Sicilian shepherd of Greek pastoral poetry, was said
to have followed into Phrygia his mistress Piplea, who had been carried off
by robbers, and to have found her in the power of the king of Phrygia,
Lityerses. Lityerses used to make strangers try a contest with him in
reaping corn, and to put them to death if he overcame them. Hercules
arrived in time to save Daphnis, took upon himself the reaping-contest
with Lityerses, overcame him, and slew him. The Lityerses-song connected
with this tradition was, like the Linus-song, one of the early plaintive
strains of Greek popular poetry, and used to be sung by corn-reapers.
Other traditions represented Daphnis as beloved by a nymph who exacted
from him an oath to love no one else. He fell in love with a princess,
and was struck blind by the jealous nymph. Mercury, who was his father,
raised him to Heaven, and made a fountain spring up in the place from
which he ascended. At this fountain the Sicilians offered yearly sacrifices.&mdash;See
Servius, <i>Comment. in Virgil. Bucol.</i>, v. 20, and viii. 68.</p></div>
</div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_19_21" id="Footnote_19_21"></a><a href="#FNanchor_19_21"><span class="label">[19]</span></a> NOTE 19, PAGE 294.
</p><p>
<i>Ah! where is he, who should have come.</i>
</p><p>
The author's brother, William Delafield Arnold, Director of Public
Instruction in the Punjab, and author of <i>Oakfield, or Fellowship in the
East</i>, died at Gibraltar on his way home from India, April the 9th, 1859.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_20_22" id="Footnote_20_22"></a><a href="#FNanchor_20_22"><span class="label">[20]</span></a> NOTE 20, PAGE 295.
</p><p>
<i>So moonlit, saw me once of yore.</i>
</p><p>
See the poem, <i>A Summer Night</i>, p. 257.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_21_23" id="Footnote_21_23"></a><a href="#FNanchor_21_23"><span class="label">[21]</span></a> NOTE 21, PAGE 295.
</p><p>
<i>My brother! and thine early lot.</i>
</p><p>
See Note 19.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_22_24" id="Footnote_22_24"></a><a href="#FNanchor_22_24"><span class="label">[22]</span></a> NOTE 22, PAGE 299.
</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>I saw the meeting of two</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>Gifted women.</i><br /></span>
</div></div>
<p>
Charlotte Bront&euml; and Harriet Martineau.
<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_507" id="Page_507">[507]</a></span></p>
</div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_23_25" id="Footnote_23_25"></a><a href="#FNanchor_23_25"><span class="label">[23]</span></a> NOTE 23, PAGE 302.
</p><p>
<i>Whose too bold dying song.</i>
</p><p>
See the last verses by Emily Bront&euml; in <i>Poems by Currer, Ellis, and
Acton Bell</i>.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_24_26" id="Footnote_24_26"></a><a href="#FNanchor_24_26"><span class="label">[24]</span></a> NOTE 24, PAGE 317.
</p><p>
<i>Goethe, too, had been there.</i>
</p><p>
See <i>Harzreise im Winter</i>, in Goethe's <i>Gedichte</i>.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_25_27" id="Footnote_25_27"></a><a href="#FNanchor_25_27"><span class="label">[25]</span></a> NOTE 25, PAGE 325.
</p><p>
The author of <i>Obermann</i>, &Eacute;tienne Pivert de Senancour, has little celebrity
in France, his own country; and out of France he is almost unknown.
But the profound inwardness, the austere sincerity, of his principal work,
<i>Obermann</i>, the delicate feeling for nature which it exhibits, and the melancholy
eloquence of many passages of it, have attracted and charmed some
of the most remarkable spirits of this century, such as George Sand and
Sainte-Beuve, and will probably always find a certain number of spirits
whom they touch and interest.
</p><p>
Senancour was born in 1770. He was educated for the priesthood,
and passed some time in the seminary of St. Sulpice; broke away from the
Seminary and from France itself, and passed some years in Switzerland,
where he married; returned to France in middle life, and followed thenceforward
the career of a man of letters, but with hardly any fame or success.
He died an old man in 1846, desiring that on his grave might be placed
these words only: <i>&Eacute;ternit&eacute;, deviens mon asile!</i>
</p><p>
The influence of Rousseau, and certain affinities with more famous and
fortunate authors of his own day,&mdash;Chateaubriand and Madame de Sta&euml;l,&mdash;are
everywhere visible in Senancour. But though, like these eminent
personages, he may be called a sentimental writer, and though <i>Obermann</i>,
a collection of letters from Switzerland treating almost entirely of nature
and of the human soul, may be called a work of sentiment, Senancour has
a gravity and severity which distinguish him from all other writers of the
sentimental school. The world is with him in his solitude far less than it
is with them; of all writers he is the most perfectly isolated and the least
attitudinising. His chief work, too, has a value and power of its own,
apart from these merits of its author. The stir of all the main forces, by
which modern life is and has been impelled, lives in the letters of <i>Obermann</i>;
the dissolving agencies of the eighteenth century, the fiery storm of the
French Revolution, the first faint promise and dawn of that new world
<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_508" id="Page_508">[508]</a></span>
which our own time is but now more fully bringing to light,&mdash;all these are
to be felt, almost to be touched, there. To me, indeed, it will always
seem that the impressiveness of this production can hardly be rated too high.
</p><p>
Besides <i>Obermann</i> there is one other of Senancour's works which, for
those spirits who feel his attraction, is very interesting; its title is, <i>Libres
M&eacute;ditations d'un Solitaire Inconnu</i>.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_26_28" id="Footnote_26_28"></a><a href="#FNanchor_26_28"><span class="label">[26]</span></a> NOTE 26, PAGE 326.
</p><p>
<i>Behind are the abandon'd baths.</i>
</p><p>
The Baths of Leuk. This poem was conceived, and partly composed,
in the valley going down from the foot of the Gemmi Pass towards the
Rhone.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_27_29" id="Footnote_27_29"></a><a href="#FNanchor_27_29"><span class="label">[27]</span></a> NOTE 27, PAGE 332.
</p><p>
<i>Glion?&mdash;&mdash;Ah, twenty years, it cuts.</i>
</p><p>
Probably all who know the Vevey end of the Lake of Geneva, will
recollect Glion, the mountain-village above the castle of Chillon. Glion
now has hotels, <i>pensions</i>, and villas; but twenty years ago it was hardly
more than the huts of Avant opposite to it,&mdash;huts through which goes that
beautiful path over the Col de Jaman, followed by so many foot-travellers
on their way from Vevey to the Simmenthal and Thun.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_28_30" id="Footnote_28_30"></a><a href="#FNanchor_28_30"><span class="label">[28]</span></a> NOTE 28, PAGE 333.
</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>The gentian-flower'd pass, its crown</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>With yellow spires aflame.</i><br /></span>
</div></div>
<p>
The blossoms of the <i>Gentiana lutea</i>.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_29_31" id="Footnote_29_31"></a><a href="#FNanchor_29_31"><span class="label">[29]</span></a> NOTE 29, PAGE 333.
</p><p>
<i>And walls where Byron came.</i>
</p><p>
Montbovon. See Byron's Journal, in his <i>Works</i>, vol. iii. p. 258. The
river Saane becomes the Sarine below Montbovon.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_30_32" id="Footnote_30_32"></a><a href="#FNanchor_30_32"><span class="label">[30]</span></a> NOTE 30, PAGE 429.
</p><p>
<i>And the kind, chance-arrived Wanderer.</i>
</p><p>
Poias, the father of Philoctetes. Passing near, he was attracted by the
concourse round the pyre, and at the entreaty of Hercules set fire to it,
receiving the bow and arrows of the hero as his reward.
<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_509" id="Page_509">[509]</a></span></p>
</div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_31_33" id="Footnote_31_33"></a><a href="#FNanchor_31_33"><span class="label">[31]</span></a> NOTE 31, PAGE 462.
</p><p>
<i>And that curst treachery on the Mount of Gore.</i>
</p><p>
Mount H&aelig;mus, so called, said the legend, from Typho's blood spilt on
it in his last battle with Zeus, when the giant's strength failed, owing to the
Destinies having a short time before given treacherously to him, for his
refreshment, perishable fruits. See <span class="smcap">Apollodorus</span>, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, book i.
chap. vi.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_32_34" id="Footnote_32_34"></a><a href="#FNanchor_32_34"><span class="label">[32]</span></a> NOTE 32, PAGE 468
</p><p>
<i>Ye Sun-born Virgins! on the road of truth.</i>
</p><p>
See the Fragments of Parmenides:
</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">...
&#954;&#959;&#965;&#961;&#945;&#953; &#948;' &#8001;&#948;&#959;&#957;
&#951;&#947;&#949;&#956;&#8001;&#957;&#949;&#965;&#959;&#957;,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&#951;&#955;&#953;&#945;&#948;&#949;&#962; &#954;&#959;&#965;&#961;&#945;&#953;,
&#960;&#961;&#959;&#955;&#953;&#960;&#959;&#965;&#963;&#945;&#953; &#948;&#8033;&#956;&#945;&#964;&#945;
&#957;&#965;&#954;&#964;&#8001;&#962;,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">&#949;&#953;&#962; &#966;&#7937;&#959;&#962;....<br /></span>
</div></div></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_33_35" id="Footnote_33_35"></a><a href="#FNanchor_33_35"><span class="label">[33]</span></a> NOTE 33, PAGE 479.
</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>Couldst thou no better keep, O Abbey old,</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The boon thy dedication-sign foretold.</i><br /></span>
</div></div>

<div class="blockquot"><p>"Ailred of Rievaulx, and several other writers, assert that Sebert, king
of the East Saxons and nephew of Ethelbert, founded the Abbey of Westminster
very early in the seventh century.
</p><p>
"Sulcardus, who lived in the time of William the Conqueror, gives a
minute account of the miracle supposed to have been worked at the consecration
of the Abbey.
</p><p>
"The church had been prepared against the next day for dedication.
On the night preceding, St. Peter appeared on the opposite side of the
water to a fisherman, desiring to be conveyed to the farther shore. Having
left the boat, St. Peter ordered the fisherman to wait, promising him a
reward on his return. An innumerable host from heaven accompanied the
apostle, singing choral hymns, while everything was illuminated with a
supernatural light. The dedication having been completed, St. Peter
returned to the fisherman, quieted his alarm at what had passed, and
announced himself as the apostle. He directed the fisherman to go as
soon as it was day to the authorities, to state what he had seen and heard,
and to inform them that, in corroboration of his testimony, they would find
the marks of consecration on the walls of the church. In obedience to the
apostle's direction, the fisherman waited on Mellitus, Bishop of London,
who, going to the church, found not only marks of the chrism, but of the
tapers with which the church had been illuminated. Mellitus, therefore,
<span class='pagenum'><a name="Page_510" id="Page_510">[510]</a></span>desisted from proceeding to a new consecration, and contented himself
with the celebration of the mass."&mdash;<span class="smcap">Dugdale</span>, <i>Monasticon Anglicanum</i>
(edition of 1817), vol. i. pp. 265, 266. See also <span class="smcap">Montalembert</span>, <i>Les
'Moines d'Occident</i>, vol. iii. pp. 428-432.</p></div>
</div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_34_36" id="Footnote_34_36"></a><a href="#FNanchor_34_36"><span class="label">[34]</span></a> NOTE 34, PAGE 482.
</p><p>
<i>The charm'd babe of the Eleusinian king.</i>
</p><p>
Demopho&ouml;n, son of Celeus, king of Eleusis. See, in the <i>Homeric
Hymns</i>, the <i>Hymn to Demeter</i>, 184-298.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_35_37" id="Footnote_35_37"></a><a href="#FNanchor_35_37"><span class="label">[35]</span></a> NOTE 35, PAGE 483.
</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><i>That Pair, whose head did plan, whom hands did forge</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0"><i>The Temple in the pure Parnassian gorge.</i><br /></span>
</div></div>
<p>
Agamedes and Trophonius, the builders of the temple of Apollo at
Delphi. See Plutarch, <i>Consolatio ad Apollonium</i>, c. 14.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_36_38" id="Footnote_36_38"></a><a href="#FNanchor_36_38"><span class="label">[36]</span></a> NOTE 36, PAGE 493.
</p><p>
<i>Stol'n from Aristophanes.</i>
</p><p>
See <i>The Birds</i> of Aristophanes, 465-485.</p></div>


<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_37_39" id="Footnote_37_39"></a><a href="#FNanchor_37_39"><span class="label">[37]</span></a> NOTE 37, PAGE 495.
</p><p>
<i>Of Robin's reed.</i>
</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">"<a name="corr2" id="corr2"></a><a class="correction" href="#cn2" title="The number 1 removed from the front of
the line">Come, join the</a> melancholious croon<br /></span>
<span class="i2">O' Robin's reed."&mdash;<span class="smcap">Burns</span>, <i>Poor Mailie's Elegy</i>.<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>