<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Poetry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="alaric-at-rome" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="title">Alaric at Rome</h2>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">A Prize Poem Recited in Rugby School, June 12, 1840</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Admire, exult, despise, laugh, weep, for here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is such matter for all feeling.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Childe Harold</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-1">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Unwelcome shroud of the forgotten dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oblivion’s dreary fountain, where art thou:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why speed’st thou not thy deathlike wave to shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er humbled pride, and self-reproaching woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or time’s stern hand, why blots it not away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The saddening tale that tells of sorrow and decay?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-2">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">There are, whose glory passeth not away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even in the grave their fragrance cannot fade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others there are as deathless full as they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who for themselves a monument have made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By their own crimes⁠—a lesson to all eyes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wonder to the fool⁠—of warning to the wise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-3">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yes, there are stories registered on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yes, there are stains time’s fingers cannot blot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deeds that shall live when they who did them, die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Things that may cease, but never be forgot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet some there are, their very lives would give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be remembered thus, and yet they cannot live.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-4">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But thou, imperial City! that hast stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In greatness once, in sackcloth now and tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mighty name, for evil or for good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even in the loneness of thy widowed years:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou that hast gazed, as the world hurried by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon its headlong course with sad prophetic eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-5">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Is thine the laurel-crown that greatness wreathes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Round the wan temples of the hallowed dead⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is it the blighting taint dishonour breathes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fires undying o’er the guilty head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the brief splendour of that meteor light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for a moment gleams, and all again is night?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-6">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Fain would we deem that thou hast risen so high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy dazzling light an eagle’s gaze should tire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No meteor brightness to be seen and die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No passing pageant, born but to expire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But full and deathless as the deep dark hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ocean’s sleeping face, or heaven’s unbroken blue.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-7">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yet stains there are to blot thy brightest page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wither half the laurels on thy tomb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A glorious manhood, yet a dim old age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And years of crime, and nothingness, and gloom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then that mightiest crash, that giant fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambition’s boldest dream might sober and appal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-8">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thou wondrous chaos, where together dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Present and past, the living and the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shattered mass, whose glorious ruins tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vanisht might of that discrownèd head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all we see, or do, or hear, or say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems strangely echoed back by tones of yesterday:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-9">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thou solemn grave, where every step we tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Treads on the slumbering dust of other years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The while there sleeps within thy precincts dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What once had human passions, hopes, and fears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And memory’s gushing tide swells deep and full</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And makes thy very ruin fresh and beautiful.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-10">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Alas, no common sepulchre art thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No habitation for the nameless dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Green turf above, and crumbling dust below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance some mute memorial at their head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one vast fane where all unconscious sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth’s old heroic forms in peaceful slumbers deep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-11">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thy dead are kings, thy dust are palaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Relics of nations thy memorial-stones:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the dim glories of departed days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fold like a shroud around thy withered bones:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And o’er thy towers the wind’s half-uttered sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispers, in mournful tones, thy silent elegy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-12">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yes, in such eloquent silence didst thou lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the Goth stooped upon his stricken prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the deep hues of an Italian sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flasht on the rude barbarian’s wild array:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While full and ceaseless as the ocean roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horde after horde streamed up thy frowning Capitol.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-13">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Twice, ere that day of shame, the embattled foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had gazed in wonder on that glorious sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twice had the eternal city bowed her low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sullen homage to the invader’s might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twice had the pageant of that vast array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swept, from thy walls, O Rome, on its triumphant way.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-14">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Twice, from without thy bulwarks, hath the din</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gothic clarion smote thy startled ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anger, and strife, and sickness are within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Famine and sorrow are no strangers here:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twice hath the cloud hung o’er thee, twice been stayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even in the act to burst, twice threatened, twice delayed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-15">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yet once again, stern Chief, yet once again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pour forth the foaming vials of thy wrath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There lies thy goal, to miss or to attain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gird thee, and on upon thy fateful path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world hath bowed to Rome, oh! cold were he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would not burst his bonds, and in his turn be free.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-16">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Therefore arise and arm thee! lo, the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looks on in fear! and when the seal is set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The doom pronounced, the battle-flag unfurled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scourge of the nations, wouldst thou linger yet?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arise and arm thee! spread thy banners forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pour from a thousand hills thy warriors of the north!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-17">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Hast thou not marked on a wild autumn day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the wind slumbereth in a sudden lull,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What deathlike stillness o’er the landscape lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How calmly sad, how sadly beautiful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How each bright tint of tree, and flower, and heath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were mingling with the sere and withered hues of death?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-18">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And thus, beneath the clear, calm vault of heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mournful loveliness that city lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus, amid the glorious hues of even</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That city told of languor and decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till what at morning’s hour lookt warm and bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was cold and sad beneath that breathless, voiceless night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-19">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Soon was that stillness broken: like the cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the hoarse onset of the surging wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or louder rush of whirlwinds sweeping by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the wild shout those Gothic myriads gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As towered on high, above their moonlit road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scenes where a Caesar triumpht, or a Scipio trod.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-20">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Think ye it strikes too slow, the sword of fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think ye the avenger loiters on his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That your own hands must open wide the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And your own voice guide him to his prey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alas, it needs not; is it hard to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fate’s threat’nings are not vain, the spoiler comes not slow?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-21">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And were there none, to stand and weep alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as the pageant swept before their eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hear a dim and long forgotten tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell of old times, and holiest memories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till fanciful regret and dreamy woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peopled night’s voiceless shades with forms of long Ago?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-22">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Oh yes! if fancy feels, beyond to-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thoughts of the past and of the future time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How should that mightiest city pass away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not bethink her of her glorious prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilst every chord that thrills at thoughts of home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jarr’d with the bursting shout, “they come, the Goth, they come!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-23">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The trumpet swells yet louder: they are here!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yea, on your fathers’ bones the avengers tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not this the time to weep upon the bier</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That holds the ashes of your hero-dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If wreaths may twine for you, or laurels wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shall not deck your life, but sanctify your grave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-24">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Alas! no wreaths are here. Despair may teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cowards to conquer and the weak to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor tongue of man, nor fear, nor shame can preach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So stern a lesson as necessity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet here it speaks not. Yea, though all around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhallowed feet are trampling on this haunted ground,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-25">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Though every holiest feeling, every tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That binds the heart of man with mightiest power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All natural love, all human sympathy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be crusht, and outraged in this bitter hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here is no echo to the sound of home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No shame that suns should rise to light a conquer’d Rome.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-26">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">That troublous night is over: on the brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thy stern hill, thou mighty Capitol,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One form stands gazing: silently below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morning mists from tower and temple roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lo! the eternal city, as they rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bursts, in majestic beauty, on her conqueror’s eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-27">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yes, there he stood, upon that silent hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there beneath his feet his conquest lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlike that ocean-city, gazing still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smilingly forth upon her sunny bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But o’er her vanisht might and humbled pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mourning, as widowed Venice o’er her Adrian tide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-28">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Breathe there not spirits on the peopled air?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Float there not voices on the murmuring wind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh! sound there not some strains of sadness there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To touch with sorrow even a victor’s mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrest one tear from joy! Oh! who shall pen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thoughts that toucht thy breast, thou lonely conqueror, then?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-29">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Perchance his wandering heart was far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lost in dim memories of his early home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his young dreams of conquest; how to-day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld him master of Imperial Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crowning his wildest hopes: perchance his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they looked sternly on, beheld new victories,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-30">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">New dreams of wide dominion, mightier, higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come floating up from the abyss of years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance that solemn sight might quench the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even of that ardent spirit; hopes and fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might well be mingling at that murmured sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispering from all around, “All earthly things must die.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-31">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Perchance that wondrous city was to him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as one voiceless blank; a place of graves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And recollections indistinct and dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sons were conquerors once, and now were slaves:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It may be in that desolate sight his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw but another step to climb to victory!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-32">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Alas! that fiery spirit little knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The change of life, the nothingness of power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How both were hastening, as they flowered and grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nearer and nearer to their closing hour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How every birth of time’s miraculous womb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swept off the withered leaves that hide the naked tomb.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-33">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">One little year; that restless soul shall rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That frame of vigour shall be crumbling clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tranquilly, above that troubled breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sunny waters hold their joyous way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gently shall the murmuring ripples flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor wake the weary soul that slumbers on below.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-34">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Alas! far other thoughts might well be ours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dash our holiest raptures while we gaze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Energies wasted, unimproved hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The saddening visions of departed days:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And while they rise here might we stand alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mingle with thy ruins somewhat of our own.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-35">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Beautiful city! If departed things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever again put earthly likeness on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here should a thousand forms on fancy’s wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Float up to tell of ages that are gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yea, though hand touch thee not, nor eye should see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still should the spirit hold communion, Rome, with thee!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-36">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O! it is bitter, that each fairest dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should fleet before us but to melt away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wildest visions still should loveliest seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soonest fade in the broad glare of day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That while we feel the world is dull and low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing on thee, we wake to find it is not so.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-37">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A little while, alas! a little while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the same world has tongue, and ear, and eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The careless glance, the cold unmeaning smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thoughtless word, the lack of sympathy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who would not turn him from the barren sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rest his weary eyes on the green land and thee!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="alaric-at-rome-38">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So pass we on. But oh! to harp aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vanisht glories of thine early day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There needs a minstrel of diviner might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A holier incense than this feeble lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chant thy requiem with more passionate breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twine with bolder hand thy last memorial wreath!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="cromwell" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="title">Cromwell</h2>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">A Prize Poem Recited in the Theatre, Oxford, June 28, 1843</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p xml:lang="de">
						<span>Schrecklich ist es, deiner Wahrheit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sterbliches Gefäss zu seyn.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Schiller</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">High fate is theirs, ye sleepless waves, whose ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learns Freedom’s lesson from your voice of fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose spell-bound sense from childhood’s hour hath known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Familiar meanings in your mystic tone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds of deep import⁠—voices that beguile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Age of its tears and childhood of its smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To yearn with speechless impulse to the free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gladsome greetings of the buoyant sea!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High fate is theirs, who where the silent sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stoops to the soaring mountains, live and die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who scale the cloud-capt height, or sink to rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the deep stillness of its shelt’ring breast;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around whose feet the exulting waves have sung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal hills their giant shadows flung.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">No wonders nurs’d thy childhood; not for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did the waves chant their song of liberty!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine was no mountain home, where Freedom’s form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abides enthron’d amid the mist and storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whispers to the listening winds, that swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With solemn cadence round her citadel!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These had no sound for thee: that cold calm eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lit with no rapture as the storm swept by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mark with shiver’d crest the reeling wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide his torn head beneath his sunless cave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hear, ’mid circling crags, the impatient cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the pent winds, that scream in agony!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet all high sounds that mountain children hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flash’d from thy soul upon thine inward ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All Freedom’s mystic language⁠—storms that roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By hill or wave, the mountain or the shore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All these had stirr’d thy spirit, and thine eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In common sights read secret sympathy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till all bright thoughts that hills or waves can yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deck’d the dull waste, and the familiar field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wondrous sounds from tranquil skies were borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far o’er the glistening sheets of windy corn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skies⁠—that unbound by clasp of mountain chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slope stately down, and melt into the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds⁠—such as erst the lone wayfaring man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught, as he journeyed, from the lips of Pan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that mysterious cry, that smote with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like sounds from other worlds, the Spartan’s ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While o’er the dusty plain, the murmurous throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Heaven’s embattled myriads swept along.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Say not such dreams are idle: for the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still toils to perfect what the child began;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thoughts, that were but outlines, time engraves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep on his life; and childhood’s baby waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made rough with care, become the changeful sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stemm’d by the strength of manhood fearlessly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fleeting thoughts, that on the lonely wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swept o’er the fancy of that heedless child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance had quicken’d with a living truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cold dull soil of his unfruitful youth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, with his daily life, a life, that threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its shadows o’er the future, flower’d and grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With common cares unmingling, and apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haunting the shrouded chambers of his heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till life, unstirr’d by action, life became</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threaded and lighten’d by a track of flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An inward light, that, with its streaming ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dark current of his changeless day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound all his being with a silver chain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a swift river through a silent plain!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">High thoughts were his, when by the gleaming flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heart new strung, and stern resolve, he stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where rode the tall dark ships, whose loosen’d sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All idly flutter’d in the eastern gale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High thoughts were his;⁠—but Memory’s glance the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell on the cherish’d past with tearful smile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And peaceful joys and gentler thoughts swept by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like summer lightnings o’er a darken’d sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peace of childhood, and the thoughts that roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like loving shadows, round that childhood’s home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joys that had come and vanish’d, half unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then slowly brighten’d, as the days had flown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Years that were sweet or sad, becalm’d or toss’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On life’s wild waves⁠—the living and the lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth stain’d with follies: and the thoughts of ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crush’d, as they rose, by manhood’s sterner will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repentant prayers, that had been strong to save;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the first sorrow, which is childhood’s grave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All shapes that haunt remembrance⁠—soft and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a green land at sunset, all were there!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes that he knew, old faces, unforgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gaz’d sadly down on his unrestful lot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Memory’s calm clear voice, and mournful eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chill’d every buoyant hope that floated by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like frozen winds on southern vales that blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a far land⁠—the children of the snow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er flowering plain and blossom’d meadow fling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cold dull shadow of their icy wing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then Fancy’s roving visions, bold and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment dispossess’d reality.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All airy hopes that idle hearts can frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like dreams between two sorrows, went and came:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fond hearts that fain would clothe the unwelcome truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of toilsome manhood in the dreams of youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bend in rapture at some idle throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some lifeless soulless phantom of their own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some shadowy vision of a tranquil life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of joys unclouded, years unstirr’d by strife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sleep unshadow’d by a dream of woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many a lawny hill, and streams with silver flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of giant mountains by the western main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunless forest, and the sea-like plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those lingering hopes of coward hearts, that still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would play the traitor to the steadfast will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One moment’s space, perchance, might charm his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the stern future, and the years gone by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One moment’s space might waft him far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To western shores⁠—the death-place of the day!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might paint the calm, sweet peace⁠—the rest of home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far o’er the pathless waste of labouring foam⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace, that recall’d his childish hours anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More calm, more deep, than childhood ever knew!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green happy places⁠—like a flowery lea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the barren mountains and the stormy sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O pleasant rest, if once the race were run!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O happy slumber, if the day were done!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreams that were sweet at eve, at morn were sin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cares to conquer, and a goal to win!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His were no tranquil years⁠—no languid sleep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No life of dreams⁠—no home beyond the deep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No softening ray⁠—no visions false and wild⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No glittering hopes on life’s gray distance smiled⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like isles of sunlight on a mountain’s brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lit by a wandering gleam, we know not how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far on the dim horizon, when the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glooming clouds broods dark and heavily.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then his eye slumber’d, and the chain was broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bound his spirit, and his heart awoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then⁠—like a kingly river⁠—swift and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The future roll’d its gathering tides along!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shout of onset and the shriek of fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote, like the rush of waters, on his ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his eye kindled with the kindling fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The surging battle and the mail’d array!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All wondrous deeds the coming days should see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the long Vision of the years to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale phantom hosts, like shadows, faint and far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Councils, and armies, and the pomp of war!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one sway’d all, who wore a kingly crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until another rose and smote him down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A form that tower’d above his brother men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A form he knew⁠—but it was shrouded then!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stern, slow steps⁠—unseen⁠—yet still the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By leaguer’d tower and tented field it came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Naseby’s hill, o’er Marston’s heathy waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Worcester’s field the warrior-vision pass’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their deep base, thy beetling cliffs, Dunbar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang, as he trode them, with the voice of war!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soldier kindled at his words of fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The statesman quail’d before his glance of ire!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worn was his brow with cares no thought could scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His step was loftier than the steps of man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the winds told his glory, and the wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sonorous witness to his empire gave!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">What forms are these, that with complaining sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slow, reluctant steps are gathering round?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forms that with him shall tread life’s changing stage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cross his lone path, or share his pilgrimage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, as he gazed, a wondrous band⁠—they came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pym’s look of hate, and Strafford’s glance of flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Laud, with noiseless steps and glittering eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In priestly garb, a frail old man, went by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His drooping head bowed meekly on his breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands were folded, like a saint at rest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Hampden bent him o’er his saddle bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And death’s cold dews bedimm’d his earnest brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still turn’d to watch the battle⁠—still forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself, his sufferings, in his country’s lot!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Falkland eyed the strife that would not cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook back his tangled locks, and murmur’d⁠—“Peace!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With feet that spurn’d the ground, lo! Milton there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood like a statue; and his face was fair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair beyond human beauty; and his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That knew not earth, soar’d upwards to the sky!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He, too, was there⁠—it was the princely boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The child-companion of his childish joy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But oh! how chang’d⁠—those deathlike features wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Childhood’s bright glance, and sunny smile no more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That brow so sad, so pale, so full of care⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What trace of careless childhood linger’d there?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What spring of youth in that majestic mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sadly calm, so kingly, so serene?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No⁠—all was chang’d⁠—the monarch wept alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between a ruin’d church and shatter’d throne!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friendless and hopeless⁠—like a lonely tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On some bare headland, straining mournfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all night long its weary moan doth make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the vex’d waters of a mountain lake!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, as he gaz’d, the phantom’s mournful glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook the deep slumber of his deathlike trance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like some forgotten strain that haunts us still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That calm eye follow’d, turn him where he will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the pale monarch, and the long array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass’d, like a morning mist, in tears away!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then all his dream was troubled, and his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrill’d with a dread no slumber could control;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On that dark form his eyes had gaz’d before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor known it then;⁠—but it was veil’d no more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In broad clear light the ghastly vision shone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That form was his⁠—those features were his own!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night of terrors, and the day of care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The years of toil, all, all were written there!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad faces watch’d around him, and his breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came faint and feeble in the embrace of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gathering tempest, with its voice of fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His latest loftiest music, smote his ear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day of boundless hope and promise high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day that hail’d his triumphs, saw him die!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from those whitening lips, as death drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The imprisoning chains fell off, and all was clear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like lowering clouds, that at the close of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bath’d in a blaze of sunset, melt away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with its clear calm tones, that dying prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheer’d all the failing hearts that sorrow’d there!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">A life⁠—whose ways no human thought could scan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A life⁠—that was not as the life of man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A life⁠—that wrote its purpose with a sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moulding itself into action, not in word!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rent with tumultuous thoughts, whose conflict rung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep through his soul, and chok’d his faltering tongue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heart that reck’d not of the countless dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That strew’d the blood-stain’d path where Empire led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A daring hand, that shrunk not to fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought that spurr’d it; and a dauntless will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold action’s parent; and a piercing ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dark chambers of the hearts of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To read each thought, and teach that master-mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fears and hopes and passions of mankind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All these were thine⁠—Oh thought of fear!⁠—and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch’d on that bed of death, art nothing now.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then all his vision faded, and his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang from its sleep! and lo, the waters roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more beneath him; and the fluttering sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the dark ships rode proudly, woo’d the gale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wind murmur’d round him, and he stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more alone beside the gleaming flood.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-gipsy-child-by-the-sea-shore" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To a Gipsy Child by the Sea-Shore</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Douglas, Isle of Man</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Who taught this pleading to unpractis’d eyes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hid such import in an infant’s gloom?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lent thee, child, this meditative guise?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What clouds thy forehead, and fore-dates thy doom?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lo! sails that gleam a moment and are gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swinging waters, and the cluster’d pier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not idly Earth and Ocean labour on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor idly do these sea-birds hover near.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But thou, whom superfluity of joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wafts not from thine own thoughts, nor longings vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor weariness, the full-fed soul’s annoy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remaining in thy hunger and thy pain;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou, drugging pain by patience; half averse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thine own mother’s breast, that knows not thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eyes which sought thine eyes thou didst converse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that soul-searching vision fell on me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Glooms that go deep as thine I have not known:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moods of fantastic sadness, nothing worth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sorrow and thy calmness are thine own:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glooms that enhance and glorify this earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What mood wears like complexion to thy woe?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His, who in mountain glens, at noon of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits rapt, and hears the battle break below?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! thine was not the shelter, but the fray.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What exile’s, changing bitter thoughts wth glad?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What seraph’s, in some alien planet born?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No exile’s dream was ever half so sad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor any angel’s sorrow so forlorn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is the calm thine of stoic souls, who weigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life well, and find it wanting, nor deplore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in disdainful silence turn away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand mute, self-centred, stern, and dream no more?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or do I wait, to hear some grey-hair’d king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unravel all his many-colour’d lore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose mind hath known all arts of governing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mus’d much, lov’d life a little, loath’d it more?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Down the pale cheek long lines of shadow slope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which years, and curious thought, and suffering give⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast foreknown the vanity of hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foreseen thy harvest⁠—yet proceed’st to live.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O meek anticipant of that sure pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose sureness gray-hair’d scholars hardly learn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wonder shall time breed, to swell thy strain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What heavens, what earth, what sun shalt thou discern?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ere the long night, whose stillness brooks no star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Match that funereal aspect with her pall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think, thou wilt have fathom’d life too far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have known too much⁠—or else forgotten all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Guide of our dark steps a triple veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt our senses and our sorrow keeps:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath sown with cloudless passages the tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of grief, and eas’d us with a thousand sleeps.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! not the nectarous poppy lovers use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not daily labour’s dull, Lethaean spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oblivion in lost angels can infuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the soil’d glory, and the trailing wing;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And though thou glean, what strenuous gleaners may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the throng’d fields where winning comes by strife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though the just sun gild, as all men pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some reaches of thy storm-vext stream of life;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though that blank sunshine blind thee: though the cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sever’d the world’s march and thine, is gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though ease dulls grace, and Wisdom be too proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To halve a lodging that was all her own:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once, ere the day decline, thou shalt discern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh once, ere night, in thy success, thy chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the long evening close, thou shalt return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wear this majesty of grief again.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="mycerinus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Mycerinus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>“Not by the justice that my father spurn’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for the thousands whom my father slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Altars unfed and temples overturn’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold hearts and thankless tongues, where thanks were due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell this late voice from lips that cannot lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stern sentence of the Powers of Destiny.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I will unfold my sentence and my crime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My crime, that, rapt in reverential awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sate obedient, in the fiery prime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of youth, self-govern’d, at the feet of Law;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ennobling this dull pomp, the life of kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By contemplation of diviner things.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My father lov’d injustice, and liv’d long;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crown’d with gray hairs he died, and full of sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lov’d the good he scorn’d, and hated wrong:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Gods declare my recompense to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I look’d for life more lasting, rule more high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when six years are measur’d, lo, I die!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yet surely, O my people, did I deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s justice from the all-just Gods was given:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A light that from some upper fount did beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some better archetype, whose seat was heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A light that, shining from the blest abodes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did shadow somewhat of the life of Gods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Mere phantoms of man’s self-tormenting heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which on the sweets that woo it dares not feed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain dreams, that quench our pleasures, then depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the dup’d soul, self-master’d, claims its meed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, on the strenuous just man, Heaven bestows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crown of his struggling life, an unjust close.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Seems it so light a thing then, austere Powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spurn man’s common lure, life’s pleasant things?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems there no joy in dances crown’d with flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love, free to range, and regal banquetings?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend ye on these, indeed, an unmov’d eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not Gods but ghosts, in frozen apathy?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Or is it that some Power, too wise, too strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even for yourselves to conquer or beguile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirls earth, and heaven, and men, and gods along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the broad rushing of the insurged Nile?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the great powers we serve, themselves may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaves of a tyrannous Necessity?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Or in mid-heaven, perhaps, your golden cars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where earthly voice climbs never, wing their flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in wild hunt, through mazy tracts of stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweep in the sounding stillness of the night?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in deaf ease, on thrones of dazzling sheen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drinking deep draughts of joy, ye dwell serene?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh, wherefore cheat our youth, if thus it be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one short joy, one lust, one pleasant dream?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stringing vain words of powers we cannot see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind divinations of a will supreme;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost labour: when the circumambient gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hides, if Gods, Gods careless of our doom?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The rest I give to joy. Even while I speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sand runs short; and as yon star-shot ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hemm’d by two banks of cloud, peers pale and weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, as the barrier closes, dies away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so do past and future intertwine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blotting this six years’ space, which yet is mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Six years⁠—six little years⁠—six drops of time⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet suns shall rise, and many moons shall wane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And old men die, and young men pass their prime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And languid Pleasure fade and flower again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dull Gods behold, ere these are flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revels more deep, joy keener than their own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Into the silence of the groves and woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will go forth; though something would I say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something⁠—yet what I know not: for the Gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doom they pass revoke not, nor delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayers, and gifts, and tears, are fruitless all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the night waxes, and the shadows fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye men of Egypt, ye have heard your king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go, and I return not. But the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great Gods is plain; and ye must bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill deeds, ill passions, zealous to fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their pleasure, to their feet; and reap their praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The praise of Gods, rich boon! and length of days.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>—So spake he, half in anger, half in scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one loud cry of grief and of amaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke from his sorrowing people: so he spake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turning, left them there; and with brief pause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girt with a throng of revellers, bent his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cool region of the groves he lov’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There by the river banks he wander’d on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From palm-grove on to palm-grove, happy trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their smooth tops shining sunwards, and beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burying their unsunn’d stems in grass and flowers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where in one dream the feverish time of Youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might fade in slumber, and the feet of Joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might wander all day long and never tire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here came the king, holding high feast, at morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose-crown’d; and ever, when the sun went down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred lamps beam’d in the tranquil gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From tree to tree, all through the twinkling grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revealing all the tumult of the feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flush’d guests, and golden goblets, foam’d with wine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the deep-burnish’d foliage overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Splinter’d the silver arrows of the moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It may be that sometimes his wondering soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the loud joyful laughter of his lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might shrink half startled, like a guilty man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wrestles with his dream; as some pale Shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gliding half hidden through the dusky stems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would thrust a hand before the lifted bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whispering: “A little space, and thou art mine.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be on that joyless feast his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt with mere outward seeming; he, within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took measure of his soul, and knew its strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by that silent knowledge, day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was calm’d, ennobled, comforted, sustain’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be; but not less his brow was smooth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his clear laugh fled ringing through the gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his mirth quail’d not at the mild reproof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sigh’d out by Winter’s sad tranquillity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor, pall’d with its own fullness, ebb’d and died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rich languor of long summer-days;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wither’d, when the palm-tree plumes, that roof’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their mild dark his grassy banquet-hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent to the cold winds of the showerless Spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, nor grew dark when Autumn brought the clouds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So six long years he revell’d, night and day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the mirth wax’d loudest, with dull sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes from the grove’s centre echoes came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell his wondering people of their king;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the still night, across the steaming flats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mix’d with the murmur of the moving Nile.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-hayswater-boat" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Hayswater Boat</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A region desolate and wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black, chafing water: and afloat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lonely as a truant child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a waste wood, a single boat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No mast, no sails are set thereon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It moves, but never moveth on:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And welters like a human thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the wild waves weltering.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Behind, a buried vale doth sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far down the torrent cleaves its way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In front the dumb rock rises steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fretted wall of blue and grey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shooting cliff and crumbled stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many a wild weed overgrown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All else, black water: and afloat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One rood from shore, that single boat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Last night the wind was up and strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grey-streak’d waters labour still:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong blast brought a pygmy throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that mild hollow in the hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From those twin brooks, that beachèd strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So featly strewn with drifted sand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From those weird domes of mounded green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spot the solitary scene.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This boat they found against the shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glossy rushes nodded by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One rood from land they push’d, no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then rested, listening silently.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loud rains lash’d the mountain’s crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grating shingle straggled down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night they sate; then stole away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left it rocking in the bay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Last night?⁠—I look’d, the sky was clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boat was old, a batter’d boat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sooth, it seems a hundred year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since that strange crew did ride afloat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boat hath drifted in the bay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oars have moulder’d as they lay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rudder swings⁠—yet none doth steer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What living hand hath brought it here?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-new-sirens" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The New Sirens</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Palinode</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In the cedar shadow sleeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where cool grass and fragrant glooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oft at noon had lur’d me, creeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From your darken’d palace rooms:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, who in your train at morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stroll’d and sang with joyful mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard, at evening, sounds of warning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the hoarse boughs labour in the wind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Who are they, O pensive Graces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—For I dream’d they wore your forms⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on shores and sea-wash’d places</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scoop the shelves and fret the storms?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when ships are that way tending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Troop across the flushing sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To all reefs and narrows wending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blown tresses, and with beckoning hands?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yet I see, the howling levels</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the deep are not your lair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And your tragic-vaunted revels</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are less lonely than they were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a Tyrian galley steering</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the golden springs of dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Troops, like Eastern kings, appearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stream all day through your enchanted lawn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And we too, from upland valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where some Muse, with half-curv’d frown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leans her ear to your mad sallies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the charm’d winds never drown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By faint music guided, ranging</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scar’d glens, we wander’d on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left our awful laurels hanging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came heap’d with myrtles to your throne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">From the dragon-warder’d fountains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the springs of knowledge are:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the watchers on the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the bright and morning star:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We are exiles, we are falling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We have lost them at your call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O ye false ones, at your calling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking ceilèd chambers and a palace hall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Are the accents of your luring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More melodious than of yore?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are those frail forms more enduring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the charms Ulysses bore?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That we sought you with rejoicings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till at evening we descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At a pause of Siren voicings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These vext branches and this howling sky?</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Oh! your pardon. The uncouthness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that primal age is gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the skin of dazzling smoothness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Screens not now a heart of stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love has flush’d those cruel faces;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And your slacken’d arms forgo</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The delight of fierce embraces:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those whitening bone-mounds do not grow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Come,” you say; “the large appearance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of man’s labour is but vain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we plead as firm adherence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Due to pleasure as to pain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pointing to some world-worn creatures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Come,” you murmur with a sigh:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Ah! we own diviner features,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loftier bearing, and a prouder eye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Come,” you say, “the hours are dreary:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Life is long, and will not fade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Time is lame, and we grow weary</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the slumbrous cedarn shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round our hearts, with long caresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With low sighs hath Silence stole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her load of steaming tresses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weighs, like Ossa, on the aery soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Come,” you say, “the Soul is fainting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till she search, and learn her own:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the wisdom of man’s painting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaves her riddle half unknown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come,” you say, “the brain is seeking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the princely heart is dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet this glean’d, when Gods were speaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rarer secrets than the toiling head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Come,” you say, “opinion trembles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Judgement shifts, convictions go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Life dries up, the heart dissembles:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only, what we feel, we know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath your wisdom known emotions?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will it weep our burning tears?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath it drunk of our love-potions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowning moments with the weight of years?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I am dumb. Alas! too soon, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Man’s grave reasons disappear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, I think, at God’s tribunal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some large answer you shall hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for me, my thoughts are straying</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where at sunrise, through the vines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On these lawns I saw you playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hanging garlands on your odorous pines.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">When your showering locks enwound you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And your heavenly eyes shone through:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the pine-boughs yielded round you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And your brows were starr’d with dew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And immortal forms to meet you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down the statued alleys came:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And through golden horns, to greet you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blew such music as a God may frame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yes⁠—I muse:⁠—And, if the dawning</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into daylight never grew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If the glistering wings of morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the dry noon shook their dew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If the fits of joy were longer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or the day were sooner done⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, perhaps, if Hope were stronger⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No weak nursling of an earthly sun⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pluck, pluck cypress, O pale maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dusk the hall with yew!</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For a bound was set to meetings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the sombre day dragg’d on:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the burst of joyful greetings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the joyful dawn, were gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the eye was fill’d with gazing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on raptures follow calms:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those warm locks men were praising</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Droop’d, unbraided, on your listless arms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Storms unsmooth’d your folded valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made all your cedars frown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaves were whirling in the alleys</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which your lovers wander’d down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Sitting cheerless in your bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hands propping the sunk head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do they gall you, the long hours?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hungry thought, that must be fed?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Is the pleasure that is tasted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Patient of a long review?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will the fire joy hath wasted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mus’d on, warm the heart anew?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Or, are those old thoughts returning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guests the dull sense never knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stars, set deep, yet inly burning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Germs, your untrimm’d Passion overgrew?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Once, like me, you took your station</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Watchers for a purer fire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But you droop’d in expectation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you wearied in desire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the first rose flush was steeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All the frore peak’s awful crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shepherds say, they found you sleeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some windless valley, further down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then you wept, and slowly raising</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your doz’d eyelids, sought again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Half in doubt, they say, and gazing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sadly back, the seats of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Snatch’d an earthly inspiration</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From some transient human Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And proclaim’d your vain ovation</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For those mimic raptures you had won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pluck, pluck cypress, O pale maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dusk the hall with yew!</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">With a sad, majestic motion⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a stately, slow surprise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From their earthward-bound devotion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifting up your languid eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would you freeze my louder boldness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dumbly smiling as you go?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One faint frown of distant coldness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flitting fast across each marble brow?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Do I brighten at your sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O sweet Pleaders? doth my lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find assurance in to-morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of one joy, which you have not?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O speak once! and let my sadness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this sobbing Phrygian strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sham’d and baffled by your gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blame the music of your feasts in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Scent, and song, and light, and flowers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gust on gust, the hoarse winds blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come, bind up those ringlet showers!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roses for that dreaming brow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come, once more that ancient lightness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glancing feet, and eager eyes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let your broad lamps flash the brightness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the sorrow-stricken day denies!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Through black depths of serried shadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up cold aisles of buried glade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the midst of river meadows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the looming kine are laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From your dazzled windows streaming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From your humming festal room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deep and far, a broken gleaming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reels and shivers on the ruffled gloom.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Where I stand, the grass is glowing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doubtless you are passing fair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I hear the north wind blowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I feel the cold night-air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can I look on your sweet faces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And your proud heads backward thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From this dusk of leaf-strewn places</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the dumb woods and the night alone?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But, indeed, this flux of guesses⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mad delight, and frozen calms⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mirth to-day and vine-bound tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to-morrow⁠—folded palms⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is this all? this balanc’d measure?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could life run no easier way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happy at the noon of pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passive, at the midnight of dismay?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But, indeed, this proud possession⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This far-reaching magic chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Linking in a mad succession</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fits of joy and fits of pain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have you seen it at the closing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have you track’d its clouded ways?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can your eyes, while fools are dozing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drop, with mine, adown life’s latter days?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">When a dreary light is wading</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through this waste of sunless greens⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the flashing lights are fading</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the peerless cheek of queens⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the mean shall no more sorrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the proudest no more smile⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the dawning of the morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Widens slowly westward all that while?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then, when change itself is over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the slow tide sets one way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall you find the radiant lover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even by moments, of to-day?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The eye wanders, faith is failing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O, loose hands, and let it be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proudly, like a king bewailing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, let fall one tear, and set us free!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">All true speech and large avowal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the jealous soul concedes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All man’s heart⁠—which brooks bestowal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All frank faith⁠—which passion breeds:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These we had, and we gave truly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doubt not, what we had, we gave:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">False we were not, nor unruly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lodgers in the forest and the cave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Long we wander’d with you, feeding</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our sad souls on your replies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a wistful silence reading</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All the meaning of your eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By moss-border’d statues sitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By well-heads, in summer days.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But we turn, our eyes are flitting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, the white east, and the morning rays!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And you too, O weeping Graces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sylvan Gods of this fair shade!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is there doubt on divine faces?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are the happy Gods dismay’d?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can men worship the wan features,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sunk eyes, the wailing tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of unspher’d, discrownèd creatures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souls as little godlike as their own?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Come, loose hands! The wingèd fleetness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of immortal feet is gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And your scents have shed their sweetness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And your flowers are overblown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And your jewell’d gauds surrender</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Half their glories to the day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freely did they flash their splendour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely gave it⁠—but it dies away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In the pines the thrush is waking⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo, yon orient hill in flames:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scores of true love knots are breaking</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At divorce which it proclaims.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the lamps are pal’d at morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heart quits heart, and hand quits hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Cold in that unlovely dawning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loveless, rayless, joyless you shall stand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Strew no more red roses, maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leave the lilies in their dew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pluck, pluck cypress, O pale maidens!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dusk, O dusk the hall with yew!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Shall I seek, that I may scorn her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her I lov’d at eventide?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall I ask, what faded mourner</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stands, at daybreak, weeping by my side?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pluck, pluck cypress, O pale maidens!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dusk the hall with yew!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="desire" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Desire<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Thou, who dost dwell alone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou, who dost know thine own⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou, to whom all are known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the cradle to the grave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Save, oh, save.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the world’s temptations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">From tribulations;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From that fierce anguish</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Wherein we languish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From that torpor deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Wherein we lie asleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy as death, cold as the grave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Save, oh, save.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">When the Soul, growing clearer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Sees God no nearer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When the Soul, mounting higher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">To God comes no nigher:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But the arch-fiend Pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Mounts at her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Foiling her high emprize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sealing her eagle eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And, when she fain would soar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Makes idols to adore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Changing the pure emotion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of her high devotion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To a skin-deep sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of her own eloquence:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong to deceive, strong to enslave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Save, oh, save.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">From the ingrain’d fashion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of this earthly nature</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That mars thy creature.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From grief, that is but passion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From mirth, that is but feigning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From tears, that bring no healing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From wild and weak complaining;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Thine old strength revealing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Save, oh, save.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From doubt, where all is double:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where wise men are not strong:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where comfort turns to trouble:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where just men suffer wrong:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where sorrow treads on joy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where sweet things soonest cloy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where faiths are built on dust:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where Love is half mistrust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hungry, and barren, and sharp as the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Oh, set us free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O let the false dream fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where our sick souls do lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Tossing continually.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O where thy voice doth come</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Let all doubts be dumb:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Let all words be mild:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">All strifes be reconcil’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">All pains beguil’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Light bring no blindness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Love no unkindness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Knowledge no ruin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fear no undoing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the cradle to the grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Save, oh, save.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-voice" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Voice</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">As the kindling glances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Queen-like and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Which the bright moon lances</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">From her tranquil sphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">At the sleepless waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Of a lonely mere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the wild whirling waves, mournfully, mournfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Shiver and die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">As the tears of sorrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Mothers have shed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Prayers that to-morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Shall in vain be sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">When the flower they flow for</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Lies frozen and dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall on the throbbing brow, fall on the burning breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Bringing no rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Like bright waves that fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">With a lifelike motion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the lifeless margin of the sparkling Ocean:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wild rose climbing up a mould’ring wall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gush of sunbeams through a ruin’d hall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strains of glad music at a funeral:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">So sad, and with so wild a start</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">To this long sober’d heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">So anxiously and painfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">So drearily and doubtfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, oh, with such intolerable change</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Of thought, such contrast strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O unforgotten Voice, thy whispers come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like wanderers from the world’s extremity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Unto their ancient home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain, all, all in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They beat upon mine ear again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those melancholy tones so sweet and still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those lute-like tones which in long distant years</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Did steal into mine ears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blew such a thrilling summons to my will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Yet could not shake it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drain’d all the life my full heart had to spill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Yet could not break it.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-fausta" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Fausta</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Joy comes and goes: hope ebbs and flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Like the wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Change doth unknit the tranquil strength of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Love lends life a little grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A few sad smiles: and then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Both are laid in one cold place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">In the grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dreams dawn and fly: friends smile and die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Like spring flowers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our vaunted life is one long funeral.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Men dig graves, with bitter tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For their dead hopes; and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Maz’d with doubts, and sick with fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Count the hours.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We count the hours: these dreams of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">False and hollow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall we go hence and find they are not dead?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Joys we dimly apprehend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Faces that smil’d and fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hopes born here, and born to end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Shall we follow?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="shakespeare" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Shakespeare</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Others abide our question. Thou art free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We ask and ask: Thou smilest and art still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out-topping knowledge. For the loftiest hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That to the stars uncrowns his majesty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Planting his steadfast footsteps in the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making the Heaven of Heavens his dwelling-place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spares but the cloudy border of his base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the foil’d searching of mortality:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, who didst the stars and sunbeams know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Self-school’d, self-scann’d, self-honour’d, self-secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst walk on earth unguess’d at. Better so!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All pains the immortal spirit must endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All weakness which impairs, all griefs that bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find their sole voice in that victorious brow.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-duke-of-wellington" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To the Duke of Wellington</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">On Hearing Him Mispraised</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Because thou hast believ’d, the wheels of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand never idle, but go always round:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not by their hands, who vex the patient ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mov’d only; but by genius, in the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all its chafing torrents after thaw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urg’d; and to feed whose movement, spinning sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feeble sons of pleasure set their hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in this vision of the general law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast labour’d with the foremost, hast become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laborious, persevering, serious, firm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this, thy track, across the fretful foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of vehement actions without scope or term,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Call’d History, keeps a splendour: due to wit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which saw <em>one</em> clue to life, and follow’d it.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="written-in-butlers-sermons" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Written in Butler’s Sermons</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Affections, Instincts, Principles, and Powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impulse and Reason, Freedom and Control⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So men, unravelling God’s harmonious whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rend in a thousand shreds this life of ours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain labour! Deep and broad, where none may see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring the foundations of the shadowy throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where man’s one Nature, queen-like, sits alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Centred in a majestic unity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rays her powers, like sister islands, seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linking their coral arms under the sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or cluster’d peaks, with plunging gulfs between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spann’d by aerial arches, all of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereo’er the chariot wheels of Life are roll’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In cloudy circles, to eternity.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="written-in-emersons-essays" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Written in Emerson’s Essays</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“O monstrous, dead, unprofitable world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou canst hear, and hearing, hold thy way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voice oracular hath peal’d to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day a hero’s banner is unfurl’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou no lip for welcome?” So I said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man after man, the world smil’d and pass’d by:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A smile of wistful incredulity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though one spake of life unto the dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scornful, and strange, and sorrowful; and full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bitter knowledge. Yet the Will is free:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong is the Soul, and wise, and beautiful:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seeds of godlike power are in us still:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gods are we, Bards, Saints, Heroes, if we will.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dumb judges, answer, truth or mockery?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-an-independent-preacher" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To an Independent Preacher</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Who Preached That We Should Be “In Harmony with Nature”</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>“In harmony with Nature”? Restless fool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who with such heat dost preach what were to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When true, the last impossibility;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be like Nature strong, like Nature cool:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know, man hath all which Nature hath, but more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in that <em>more</em> lie all his hopes of good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature is cruel; man is sick of blood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature is stubborn; man would fain adore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature is fickle; man hath need of rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature forgives no debt, and fears no grave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man would be mild, and with safe conscience blest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man must begin, know this, where Nature ends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature and man can never be fast friends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fool, if thou canst not pass her, rest her slave!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="in-utrumque-paratus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">In Utrumque Paratus</h2>
			<p>
				<span>If, in the silent mind of One all-pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">At first imagin’d lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred world; and by procession sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From those still deeps, in form and colour drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seasons alternating, and night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long-mus’d thought to north south east and west</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Took then its all-seen way:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O waking on a world which thus-wise springs!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whether it needs thee count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt thy waking and the birth of things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ages or hours: O waking on Life’s stream!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By lonely pureness to the all-pure Fount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Only by this thou canst) the colour’d dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of Life remount.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thin, thin the pleasant human noises grow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And faint the city gleams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rare the lone pastoral huts: marvel not thou!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The solemn peaks but to the stars are known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to the stars, and the cold lunar beams:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone the sun arises, and alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Spring the great streams.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, if the wild unfather’d mass no birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In divine seats hath known:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the blank, echoing solitude, if Earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocking her obscure body to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceases not from all time to heave and groan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfruitful oft, and, at her happiest throe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Forms, what she forms, alone:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O seeming sole to awake, thy sun-bath’d head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Piercing the solemn cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round thy still dreaming brother-world outspread!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O man, whom Earth, thy long-vext mother, bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not without joy; so radiant, so endow’d⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Such happy issue crown’d her painful care)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Be not too proud!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O when most self-exalted most alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Chief dreamer, own thy dream!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy brother-world stirs at thy feet unknown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hath a monarch’s hath no brother’s part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet doth thine inmost soul with yearning teem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O what a spasm shakes the dreamer’s heart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">“<em>I, too, but seem!</em>”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="horatian-echo" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Horatian Echo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">(To an Ambitious Friend)</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Omit, omit, my simple friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still to enquire how parties tend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or what we fix with foreign powers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If France and we are really friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what the Russian Czar intends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Is no concern of ours.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Us not the daily quickening race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the invading populace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall draw to swell that shouldering herd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mourn will we not your closing hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye imbeciles in present power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Doom’d, pompous, and absurd!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And let us bear, that they debate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the engine-work of state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of commerce, laws, and policy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The secrets of the world’s machine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what the rights of man may mean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With readier tongue than we.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Only, that with no finer art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cloak the troubles of the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pleasant smile, let us take care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor with a lighter hand dispose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh garlands of this dewy rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To crown Eugenia’s hair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of little threads our life is spun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he spins ill, who misses one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But is thy fair Eugenia cold?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet Helen had an equal grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Juliet’s was as fair a face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And now their years are told.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The day approaches, when we must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be crumbling bones and windy dust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scorn us as our mistress may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her beauty will no better be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the poor face she slights in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When dawns that day, that day.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-george-cruikshank-esq" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To George Cruikshank, <abbr class="eoc">Esq.</abbr></h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">On Seeing for the First Time His Picture of <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art">The Bottle</i>, in the Country</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Artist, whose hand, with horror wing’d, hath torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the rank life of towns this leaf: and flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prodigy of full-blown crime among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valleys and men to middle fortune born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not innocent, indeed, yet not forlorn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, what shall calm us, when such guests intrude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like comets on the heavenly solitude?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall breathless glades, cheer’d by shy Dian’s horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold-bubbling springs, or caves? Not so! The Soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breasts her own griefs: and, urg’d too fiercely, says:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why tremble? True, the nobleness of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be by man effac’d: man can control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pain, to death, the bent of his own days.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know thou the worst! So much, not more, he <em>can</em>.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fragment-of-an-antigone" epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fragment of an <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Antigone</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></h2>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well hath he done who hath seiz’d happiness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For little do the all-containing Hours,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Though opulent, freely give.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Who, weighing that life well</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Fortune presents unpray’d,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Declines her ministry, and carves his own:</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And, justice not infring’d,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Makes his own welfare his unswerv’d-from law.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>He does well too, who keeps that clue the mild</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Birth-Goddess and the austere Fates first gave.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">For from the day when these</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Bring him, a weeping child,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">First to the light, and mark</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A country for him, kinsfolk, and a home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Unguided he remains,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till the Fates come again, alone, with death.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span class="i3">In little companies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">And, our own place once left,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Ignorant where to stand, or whom to avoid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By city and household group’d, we live: and many shocks</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Our order heaven-ordain’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Must every day endure.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Voyages, exiles, hates, dissensions, wars.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Besides what waste He makes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">The all-hated, order-breaking,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Without friend, city, or home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Death, who dissevers all.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span class="i3">Him then I praise, who dares</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">To self-selected good</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Prefer obedience to the primal law,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which consecrates the ties of blood: for these, indeed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Are to the Gods a care;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">That touches but himself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For every day man may be link’d and loos’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">With strangers: but the bond</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Original, deep-inwound,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Of blood, can he not bind:</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Nor, if Fate binds, not bear.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span class="i2">But hush! Haemon, whom Antigone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Robbing herself of life in burying,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Against Creon’s law, Polynices,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Robs of a lov’d bride; pale, imploring,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Waiting her passage,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Forth from the palace hitherward comes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i2">No, no, old men, Creon, I curse not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">I weep, Thebans,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">One than Creon crueller far.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">For he, he, at least, by slaying her,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">August laws doth mightily vindicate:</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">But thou, too-bold, headstrong, pitiless,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Ah me!⁠—honourest more than thy lover,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">O Antigone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">A dead, ignorant, thankless corpse.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i5">Nor was the love untrue</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Which the Dawn-Goddess bore</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">To that fair youth she erst</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Leaving the salt sea-beds</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And coming flush’d over the stormy frith</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Of loud Euripus, saw:</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Saw and snatch’d, wild with love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">From the pine-dotted spurs</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Of Parnes, where thy waves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Asopus, gleam rock-hemm’d;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">The Hunter of the Tanagraean Field.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i6">But him, in his sweet prime,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">By severance immature,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">By Artemis’ soft shafts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">She, though a Goddess born,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Saw in the rocky isle of Delos die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Such end o’ertook that love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">For she desir’d to make</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Immortal mortal man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">And blend his happy life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Far from the Gods, with hers:</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">To him postponing an eternal law.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i3">But, like me, she, wroth, complaining,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Succumb’d to the envy of unkind Gods:</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">And, her beautiful arms unclasping,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Her fair Youth unwillingly gave.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i3">Nor, though enthron’d too high</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">To fear assault of envious Gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">His belov’d Argive seer would Zeus retain</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">From his appointed end</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">In this our Thebes; but when</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span class="i3">His flying steeds came near</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">To cross the steep Ismenian glen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">The broad Earth open’d and whelm’d them and him;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">And through the void air sang</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">At large his enemy’s spear.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>And fain would Zeus have sav’d his tired son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beholding him where the Two Pillars stand</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">O’er the sun-redden’d Western Straits:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or at his work in that dim lower world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Fain would he have recall’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">The fraudulent oath which bound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To a much feebler wight the heroic man:</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>But he preferr’d Fate to his strong desire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor did there need less than the burning pile</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Under the towering Trachis crags,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the Spercheius’ vale, shaken with groans,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And the rous’d Maliac gulph,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And scar’d Oetaean snows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To achieve his son’s deliverance, O my child.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</article>
		<article id="fragment-of-chorus-of-a-dejaneira" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fragment of Chorus of a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Dejaneira</i></h2>
			<p>
				<span>O frivolous mind of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light ignorance, and hurrying, unsure thoughts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though man bewails you not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How I bewail you!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Little in your prosperity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do you seek counsel of the Gods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud, ignorant, self-adored, you live alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In profound silence stern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among their savage gorges and cold springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unvisited remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great oracular shrines.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thither in your adversity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do you betake yourselves for light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But strangely misinterpret all you hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For you will not put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New hearts with the inquirer’s holy robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And purged, considerate minds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And him on whom, at the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of toil and dolour untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Gods have said that repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last shall descend undisturb’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him you expect to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an easy old age, in a happy home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No end but this you praise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But him, on whom, in the prime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life, with vigour undimm’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With unspent mind, and a soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unworn, undebased, undecay’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mournfully grating, the gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the city of death have for ever closed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Him</em>, I count <em>him</em>, well-starr’d.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-strayed-reveller" epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Strayed Reveller</h2>
			<p>The portico of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Circe’s</b> palace. Evening.</p>
			<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">A Youth</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Circe</b>.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Youth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Faster, faster,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Circe, Goddess,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let the wild, thronging train,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bright procession</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of eddying forms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sweep through my soul!</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Thou standest, smiling</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Down on me; thy right arm,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lean’d up against the column there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Props thy soft cheek;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy left holds, hanging loosely,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The deep cup, ivy-cinctur’d,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I held but now.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Is it then evening</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So soon? I see, the night dews,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cluster’d in thick beads, dim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The agate brooch-stones</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On thy white shoulder.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cool night-wind, too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blows through the portico,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stirs thy hair, Goddess,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Waves thy white robe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Circe</td>
						<td>Whence art thou, sleeper?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Youth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When the white dawn first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through the rough fir-planks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of my hut, by the chestnuts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Up at the valley-head,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came breaking, Goddess,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I sprang up, I threw round me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My dappled fawn-skin:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passing out, from the wet turf,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where they lay, by the hut door,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I snatch’d up my vine-crown, my fir-staff,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All drench’d in dew:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came swift down to join</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The rout early gather’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the town, round the temple,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Iacchus’ white fane</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On yonder hill.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Quick I pass’d, following</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wood-cutters’ cart-track</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Down the dark valley;⁠—I saw</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On my left, through the beeches,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy palace, Goddess,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Smokeless, empty:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Trembling, I enter’d; beheld</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The court all silent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lions sleeping;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On the altar, this bowl.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I drank, Goddess⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sunk down here, sleeping,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On the steps of thy portico.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Circe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Foolish boy! Why tremblest thou?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou lovest it, then, my wine?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wouldst more of it? See, how glows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through the delicate flush’d marble,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The red creaming liquor,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strown with dark seeds!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drink, then! I chide thee not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deny thee not my bowl.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, stretch forth thy hand, then⁠—so.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drink, drink again!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Youth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thanks, gracious One!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ah, the sweet fumes again!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More soft, ah me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More subtle-winding</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than Pan’s flute-music!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Faint⁠—faint! Ah me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Again the sweet sleep.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Circe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hist! Thou⁠—within there!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come forth, Ulysses!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Art tired with hunting?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While we range the woodland,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See what the day brings.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ulysses</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ever new magic!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast thou then lur’d hither,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wonderful Goddess, by thy art,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The young, languid-ey’d Ampelus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Iacchus’ darling⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or some youth belov’d of Pan,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Pan and the Nymphs?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he sits, bending downward</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His white, delicate neck</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the ivy-wreath’d marge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of thy cup:⁠—the bright, glancing vine-leaves</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That crown his hair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Falling forward, mingling</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the dark ivy-plants,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His fawn-skin, half untied,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Smear’d with red wine-stains? Who is he,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he sits, overweigh’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By fumes of wine and sleep,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So late, in thy portico?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What youth, Goddess⁠—what guest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Gods or mortals?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Circe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hist! he wakes!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I lur’d him not hither, Ulysses.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, ask him!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Youth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who speaks? Ah! Who comes forth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To thy side, Goddess, from within?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How shall I name him?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This spare, dark-featur’d,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quick-ey’d stranger?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ah! and I see too</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His sailor’s bonnet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His short coat, travel-tarnish’d,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With one arm bare.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Art thou not he, whom fame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This long time rumours</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The favour’d guest of Circe, brought by the waves?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Art thou he, stranger?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wise Ulysses,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Laertes’ son?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ulysses</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am Ulysses.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou, too, sleeper?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy voice is sweet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It may be thou hast follow’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through the islands some divine bard,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By age taught many things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Age and the Muses;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And heard him delighting</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The chiefs and people</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the banquet, and learn’d his songs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Gods and Heroes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of war and arts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And peopled cities,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Inland, or built</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By the grey sea.⁠—If so, then hail!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I honour and welcome thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Youth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The Gods are happy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They turn on all sides</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their shining eyes:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And see, below them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Earth, and men.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see Tiresias</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sitting, staff in hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On the warm, grassy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Asopus’ bank:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His robe drawn over</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His old, sightless head:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Revolving inly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The doom of Thebes.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see the Centaurs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the upper glens</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Pelion, in the streams,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where red-berried ashes fringe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The clear-brown shallow pools;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With streaming flanks, and heads</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rear’d proudly, snuffing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mountain wind.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see the Indian</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drifting, knife in hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His frail boat moor’d to</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A floating isle thick matted</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With large-leav’d, low-creeping melon-plants,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the dark cucumber.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He reaps, and stows them,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drifting⁠—drifting:⁠—round him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Round his green harvest-plot,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flow the cool lake-waves:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mountains ring them.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see the Scythian</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On the wide Stepp, unharnessing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His wheel’d house at noon.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He tethers his beast down, and makes his meal,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mares’ milk, and bread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bak’d on the embers:⁠—all around</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The boundless waving grass-plains stretch, thick-starr’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With saffron and the yellow hollyhock</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And flag-leav’d iris-flowers.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sitting in his cart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He makes his meal: before him, for long miles,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alive with bright green lizards,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the springing bustard-fowl,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The track, a straight black line,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Furrows the rich soil: here and there</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Clusters of lonely mounds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Topp’d with rough-hewn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grey, rain-blear’d statues, overpeer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sunny Waste.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see the Ferry</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On the broad, clay-laden</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lone Chorasmian stream: thereon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With snort and strain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two horses, strongly swimming, tow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ferry-boat, with woven ropes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To either bow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Firm-harness’d by the mane:⁠—a Chief,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With shout and shaken spear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stands at the prow, and guides them: but astern,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cowering Merchants, in long robes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sit pale beside their wealth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of silk-bales and of balsam-drops,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of gold and ivory,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of turquoise-earth and amethyst,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Jasper and chalcedony,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And milk-barr’d onyx-stones.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The loaded boat swings groaning</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the yellow eddies.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Gods behold them.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see the Heroes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sitting in the dark ship</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On the foamless, long-heaving,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Violet sea:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At sunset nearing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Happy Islands.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>These things, Ulysses,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wise Bards also</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold and sing.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But oh, what labour!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Prince, what pain!</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They too can see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tiresias;⁠—but the Gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who give them vision,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Added this law:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That they should bear too</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His groping blindness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His dark foreboding,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His scorn’d white hairs;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bear Hera’s anger</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through a life lengthen’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To seven ages.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see the Centaurs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On Pelion:⁠—then they feel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They too, the maddening wine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swell their large veins to bursting: in wild pain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They feel the biting spears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the grim Lapithae, and Theseus, drive,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drive crashing through their bones: they feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High on a jutting rock in the red stream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alcmena’s dreadful son<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ply his bow:⁠—such a price</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Gods exact for song;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To become what we sing.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see the Indian</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On his mountain lake:⁠—but squalls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make their skiff reel, and worms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the unkind spring have gnaw’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their melon-harvest to the heart: They see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Scythian:⁠—but long frosts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Parch them in winter-time on the bare Stepp,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till they too fade like grass: they crawl</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like shadows forth in spring.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see the Merchants</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On the Oxus stream:⁠—but care</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must visit first them too, and make them pale.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether, through whirling sand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A cloud of desert robber-horse have burst</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon their caravan: or greedy kings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the wall’d cities the way passes through,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Crush’d them with tolls: or fever-airs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On some great river’s marge,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mown them down, far from home.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>They see the Heroes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Near harbour:⁠—but they share</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their lives, and former violent toil in Thebes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seven-gated Thebes, or Troy:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or where the echoing oars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Argo, first,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Startled the unknown Sea.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>The old Silenus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came, lolling in the sunshine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From the dewy forest coverts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This way, at noon.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sitting by me, while his Fauns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Down at the water side</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sprinkled and smooth’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His drooping garland,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He told me these things.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>But I, Ulysses,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sitting on the warm steps,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Looking over the valley,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All day long, have seen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without pain, without labour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sometimes a wild-hair’d Maenad;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sometimes a Faun with torches;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sometimes, for a moment,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passing through the dark stems</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flowing-rob’d, the belov’d,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The desir’d, the divine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Belov’d Iacchus.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Ah, cool night-wind, tremulous stars!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ah glimmering water⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fitful earth-murmur⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dreaming woods!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ah golden-hair’d, strangely-smiling Goddess,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou, prov’d, much enduring,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wave-toss’d Wanderer!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who can stand still?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye fade, ye swim, ye waver before me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cup again!</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Faster, faster,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Circe, Goddess,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let the wild thronging train,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bright procession</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of eddying forms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sweep through my soul!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sick-king-in-bukhara" epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sick King in Bukhara</h2>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hussein</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O most just Vizier, send away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cloth-merchants, and let them be,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Them and their dues, this day: the King</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is ill at ease, and calls for thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Vizier</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O merchants, tarry yet a day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here in Bukhara: but at noon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To-morrow, come, and ye shall pay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each fortieth web of cloth to me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As the law is, and go your way.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Hussein, lead me to the King.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou teller of sweet tales, thine own,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ferdowsi’s, and the others’, lead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How is it with my lord?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hussein</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ever since prayer-time, he doth wait,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Vizier, without lying down,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the great window of the gate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Looking into the Registàn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where through the sellers’ booths the slaves</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are this way bringing the dead man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Vizier, here is the King’s door.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The King</td>
						<td>O Vizier, I may bury him?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Vizier</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O King, thou know’st, I have been sick</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These many days, and heard no thing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(For Allah shut my ears and mind),</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not even what thou dost, O King.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherefore, that I may counsel thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let Hussein, if thou wilt, make haste</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To speak in order what hath chanc’d.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The King</td>
						<td>O Vizier, be it as thou say’st.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hussein</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Three days since, at the time of prayer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A certain Mullah, with his robe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All rent, and dust upon his hair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Watch’d my lord’s coming forth, and push’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The golden mace-bearers aside,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fell at the King’s feet, and cried;</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>“Justice, O King, and on myself!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On this great sinner, who hath broke</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The law, and by the law must die!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="dl2">
									<span>Vengeance, O King!”</span>
									<span>But the King spoke:</span>
								</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“What fool is this, that hurts our ears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With folly? or what drunken slave?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My guards, what, prick him with your spears!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prick me the fellow from the path!”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As the King said, so it was done,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to the mosque my lord pass’d on.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>But on the morrow, when the King</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Went forth again, the holy book</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Carried before him, as is right,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And through the square his path he took;</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>My man comes running, fleck’d with blood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From yesterday, and falling down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cries out most earnestly: “O King,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My lord, O King, do right, I pray!</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>“How canst thou, ere thou hear, discern</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If I speak folly? but a king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether a thing be great or small,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like Allah, hears and judges all.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>“Wherefore hear thou! Thou know’st, how fierce</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In these last days the sun hath burn’d:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That the green water in the tanks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is to a putrid puddle turn’d:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the canal, which from the stream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Samarkand is brought this way,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wastes, and runs thinner every day.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>“Now I at nightfall had gone forth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alone, and in a darksome place</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Under some mulberry trees I found</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A little pool; and in brief space,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all the water that was there</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I fill’d my pitcher, and stole home</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unseen: and having drink to spare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hid the can behind the door,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And went up on the roof to sleep.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>“But in the night, which was with wind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And burning dust, again I creep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Down, having fever, for a drink.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>“Now meanwhile had my brethren found</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The water-pitcher, where it stood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behind the door upon the ground,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And call’d my mother: and they all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As they were thirsty, and the night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Most sultry, drain’d the pitcher there;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That they sate with it, in my sight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their lips still wet, when I came down.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>“Now mark! I, being fever’d, sick</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(Most unblest also) at that sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brake forth, and curs’d them⁠—dost thou hear?⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One was my mother⁠—Now, do right!”</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>But my lord mused a space, and said:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Send him away, Sirs, and make on.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is some madman,” the King said:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As the King said, so was it done.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>The morrow at the self-same hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the King’s path, behold, the man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not kneeling, sternly fix’d: he stood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Right opposite, and thus began,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Frowning grim down:⁠—“Thou wicked King,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Most deaf where thou shouldst most give ear!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What, must I howl in the next world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because thou wilt not listen here?</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>“What, wilt thou pray, and get thee grace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all grace shall to me be grudg’d?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay but, I swear, from this thy path</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will not stir till I be judg’d.”</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Then they who stood about the King</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drew close together and conferr’d:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till that the King stood forth and said,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Before the priests thou shalt be heard.”</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>But when the Ulemas were met,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the thing heard, they doubted not;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But sentenc’d him, as the law is,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To die by stoning on the spot.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Now the King charg’d us secretly:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Ston’d must he be, the law stands so:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet, if he seek to fly, give way:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hinder him not, but let him go.”</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>So saying, the King took a stone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cast it softly: but the man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With a great joy upon his face,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Kneel’d down, and cried not, neither ran.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>So they, whose lot it was, cast stones;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That they flew thick and bruis’d him sore:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But he prais’d Allah with loud voice,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And remain’d kneeling as before.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>My lord had cover’d up his face:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But when one told him, “He is dead,”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Turning him quickly to go in,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Bring thou to me his corpse,” he said.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>And truly, while I speak, O King,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hear the bearers on the stair.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wilt thou they straightway bring him in?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>—Ho! enter ye who tarry there!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Vizier</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O King, in this I praise thee not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now must I call thy grief not wise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is he thy friend, or of thy blood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To find such favour in thine eyes?</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Nay, were he thine own mother’s son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still, thou art king, and the Law stands.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It were not meet the balance swerv’d,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sword were broken in thy hands.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>But being nothing, as he is,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why for no cause make sad thy face?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lo, I am old: three kings, ere thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have I seen reigning in this place.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>But who, through all this length of time,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could bear the burden of his years,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If he for strangers pain’d his heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not less than those who merit tears?</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Fathers we <em>must</em> have, wife and child;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And grievous is the grief for these;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This pain alone, which <em>must</em> be borne,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Makes the head white, and bows the knees.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>But other loads than this his own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One man is not well made to bear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Besides, to each are his own friends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To mourn with him, and show him care.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Look, this is but one single place,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though it be great: all the earth round,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If a man bear to have it so,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Things which might vex him shall be found.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Upon the Russian frontier, where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The watchers of two armies stand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Near one another, many a man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seeking a prey unto his hand,</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Hath snatch’d a little fair-hair’d slave:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They snatch also, towards Mervè,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Shia dogs, who pasture sheep,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And up from thence to Orgunjè.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>And these all, labouring for a lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eat not the fruit of their own hands:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which is the heaviest of all plagues,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To that man’s mind, who understands.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>The kaffirs also (whom God curse!)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Vex one another, night and day:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are the lepers, and all sick:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are the poor, who faint alway.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>All these have sorrow, and keep still,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whilst other men make cheer, and sing.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wilt thou have pity on all these?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No, nor on this dead dog, O King!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The King</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Vizier, thou art old, I young.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Clear in these things I cannot see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My head is burning; and a heat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is in my skin which angers me.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>But hear ye this, ye sons of men!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They that bear rule, and are obey’d,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto a rule more strong than theirs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are in their turn obedient made.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>In vain therefore, with wistful eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gazing up hither, the poor man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who loiters by the high-heap’d booths,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Below there, in the Registàn,</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Says, “Happy he, who lodges there!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With silken raiment, store of rice,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for this drought, all kinds of fruits,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grape syrup, squares of colour’d ice,</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>“With cherries serv’d in drifts of snow.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In vain hath a king power to build</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Houses, arcades, enamell’d mosques;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to make orchard closes, fill’d</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>With curious fruit trees brought from far;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With cisterns for the winter-rain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, in the desert, spacious inns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In divers places;⁠—if that pain</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Is not more lighten’d, which he feels,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If his will be not satisfied:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that it be not, from all time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Law is planted, to abide.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Thou wert a sinner, thou poor man!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wert athirst; and didst not see,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That, though we take what we desire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We must not snatch it eagerly.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>And I have meat and drink at will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And rooms of treasures, not a few.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I am sick, nor heed I these:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And what I would, I cannot do.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Even the great honour which I have,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When I am dead, will soon grow still.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So have I neither joy, nor fame.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But what I can do, that I will.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>I have a fretted brick-work tomb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon a hill on the right hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hard by a close of apricots,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the road of Samarkand:</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Thither, O Vizier, will I bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This man my pity could not save;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, plucking up the marble flags,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There lay his body in my grave.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Bring water, nard, and linen rolls.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wash off all blood, set smooth each limb.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then say; “He was not wholly vile,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because a king shall bury him.”</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</article>
		<article id="resignation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Resignation</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">To Fausta</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>
					<em>To die be given us, or attain!</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Fierce work it were, to do again.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So pilgrims, bound for Mecca, pray’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At burning noon: so warriors said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarf’d with the cross, who watch’d the miles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dust which wreath’d their struggling files</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down Lydian mountains: so, when snows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round Alpine summits eddying rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Goth, bound Rome-wards: so the Hun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crouch’d on his saddle, while the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went lurid down o’er flooded plains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which the groaning Danube strains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the drear Euxine: so pray all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom labours, self-ordain’d, enthrall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because they to themselves propose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this side the all-common close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goal which, gain’d, may give repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So pray they: and to stand again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they stood once, to them were pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pain to thread back and to renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past straits, and currents long steer’d through.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But milder natures, and more free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom an unblam’d serenity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath freed from passions, and the state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of struggle these necessitate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom schooling of the stubborn mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath made, or birth hath found, resign’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These mourn not, that their goings pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obedience to the passing day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These claim not every laughing Hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For handmaid to their striding power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each in her turn, with torch uprear’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To await their march; and when appear’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the cold gloom, with measur’d race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To usher for a destin’d space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Her own sweet errands all foregone)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The too imperious Traveller on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, Fausta, ask not this: nor thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time’s chafing prisoner, ask it now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">We left, just ten years since, you say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wayside inn we left to-day:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our jovial host, as forth we fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouts greeting from his easy chair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High on a bank our leader stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reviews and ranks his motley bands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes clear our goal to every eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valley’s western boundary.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gate swings to: our tide hath flow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already from the silent road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valley pastures, one by one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are threaded, quiet in the sun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now beyond the rude stone bridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slopes gracious up the western ridge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its woody border, and the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of its dark upland farms is past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cool farms, with open-lying stores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under their burnish’d sycamores;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All past: and through the trees we glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Emerging on the green hill-side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There climbing hangs, a far-seen sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our wavering, many-colour’d line;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There winds, upstreaming slowly still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the summit of the hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, in front, behold outspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those upper regions we must tread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mild hollows, and clear heathy swells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cheerful silence of the fells.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some two hours’ march, with serious air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the deep noontide heats we fare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The red-grouse, springing at our sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skims, now and then, the shining ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No life, save his and ours, intrudes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon these breathless solitudes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O joy! again the farms appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cool shade is there, and rustic cheer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There springs the brook will guide us down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright comrade, to the noisy town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingering, we follow down: we gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The town, the highway, and the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a mile of dusty way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parch’d and road-worn, we made that day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, Fausta, I remember well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, as the balmy darkness fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We bath’d our hands, with speechless glee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That night, in the wide-glimmering Sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Once more we tread this self-same road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fausta, which ten years since we trod:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone we tread it, you and I;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ghosts of that boisterous company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, where the brook shines, near its head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its clear, shallow, turf-fring’d bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, whence the eye first sees, far down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Capp’d with faint smoke, the noisy town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here sit we, and again unroll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though slowly, the familiar whole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The solemn wastes of heathy hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep in the July sunshine still:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The self-same shadows now, as then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play through this grassy upland glen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loose dark stones on the green way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie strewn, it seems, where then they lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this mild bank above the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(You crush them) the blue gentians gleam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still this wild brook, the rushes cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sailing foam, the shining pool.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are not chang’d: and we, you say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are scarce more chang’d, in truth, than they.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The Gipsies, whom we met below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They too have long roam’d to and fro.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ramble, leaving, where they pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fragments on the cumber’d grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And often to some kindly place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chance guides the migratory race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, though long wanderings intervene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They recognise a former scene.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dingy tents are pitch’d: the fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to the wind their wavering spires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dark knots crouch round the wild flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their children, as when first they came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They see their shackled beasts again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move, browsing, up the gray-wall’d lane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Signs are not wanting, which might raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ghost in them of former days:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Signs are not wanting, if they would;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suggestions to disquietude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them, for all, Time’s busy touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While it mends little, troubles much:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their joints grow stiffer; but the year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs his old round of dubious cheer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chilly they grow; yet winds in March,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, sharp as ever, freeze and parch:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They must live still; and yet, God knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowded and keen the country grows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seems as if, in their decay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Law grew stronger every day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So might they reason; so compare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fausta, times past with times that are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But no:⁠—they rubb’d through yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their hereditary way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they will rub through, if they can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow on the self-same plan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till death arrive to supersede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them, vicissitude and need.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The Poet, to whose mighty heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven doth a quicker pulse impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Subdues that energy to scan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not his own course, but that of Man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he move mountains; though his day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be pass’d on the proud heights of sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he hath loos’d a thousand chains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he hath borne immortal pains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Action and suffering though he know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—He hath not liv’d, if he lives so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sees, in some great-historied land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ruler of the people stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees his strong thought in fiery flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll through the heaving multitude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exults: yet for no moment’s space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Envies the all-regarded place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful eyes meet his; and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bears to admire uncravingly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They pass; he, mingled with the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in their far-off triumphs proud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From some high station he looks down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sunset, on a populous town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surveys each happy group, which fleets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toil ended, through the shining streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each with some errand of its own;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And does not say, <em>I am alone.</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sees the gentle stir of birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Morning purifies the earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He leans upon a gate, and sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pastures, and the quiet trees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low, woody hill, with gracious bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Folds the still valley almost round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cuckoo, loud on some high lawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is answer’d from the depth of dawn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hedge straggling to the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale, dew-drench’d, half-shut roses gleam:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But where the farther side slopes down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sees the drowsy new-wak’d clown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his white quaint-embroider’d frock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make, whistling, towards his mist-wreath’d flock;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly, behind his heavy tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wet, flower’d grass heaves up its head.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lean’d on his gate, he gazes: tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are in his eyes, and in his ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmur of a thousand years:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him he sees Life unroll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A placid and continuous whole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That general Life, which does not cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose secret is not joy, but peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Life, whose dumb wish is not miss’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If birth proceeds, if things subsist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Life of plants, and stones, and rain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Life he craves; if not in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fate gave, what Chance shall not control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sad lucidity of soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">You listen:⁠—but that wandering smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fausta, betrays you cold the while.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your eyes pursue the bells of foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wash’d, eddying, from this bank, their home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><q>Those Gipsies</q>, so your thoughts I scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>Are less, the Poet more, than man.</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>They feel not, though they move and see:</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>Deeply the Poet feels; but he</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>Breathes, when he will, immortal air,</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>Where Orpheus and where Homer are.</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>In the day’s life, whose iron round</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>Hems us all in, he is not bound.</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>He leaves his kind, o’erleaps their pen,</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>And flees the common life of men.</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>He escapes thence, but we abide.</q>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<q>Not deep the Poet sees, but wide.</q>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The World in which we live and move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outlasts aversion, outlasts love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outlasts each effort, interest, hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remorse, grief, joy:⁠—and were the scope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these affections wider made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man still would see, and see dismay’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond his passion’s widest range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far regions of eternal change.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, and since death, which wipes out man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds him with many an unsolv’d plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With much unknown, and much untried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wonder not dead, and thirst not dried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still gazing on the ever full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eternal mundane spectacle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This World in which we draw our breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some sense, Fausta, outlasts death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Blame thou not therefore him, who dares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Judge vain beforehand human cares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose natural insight can discern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What through experience others learn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who needs not love and power, to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love transient, power an unreal show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who treads at ease life’s uncheer’d ways:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him blame not, Fausta, rather praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather thyself for some aim pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobler than this⁠—to fill the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather, that heart, which burns in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask, not to amuse, but to set free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be passionate hopes not ill resign’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For quiet, and a fearless mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though Fate grudge to thee and me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Poet’s rapt security,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet they, believe me, who await</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No gifts from Chance, have conquer’d Fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, winning room to see and hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to men’s business not too near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through clouds of individual strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw homewards to the general Life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like leaves by suns not yet uncurl’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the wise, foolish; to the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weak: yet not weak, I might reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not foolish, Fausta, in His eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom each moment in its race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowd as we will its neutral space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is but a quiet watershed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence, equally, the Seas of Life and Death are fed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Enough, we live:⁠—and if a life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With large results so little rife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though bearable, seem hardly worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This pomp of worlds, this pain of birth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, Fausta, the mute turf we tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The solemn hills around us spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This stream which falls incessantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strange-scrawl’d rocks, the lonely sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I might lend their life a voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem to bear rather than rejoice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even could the intemperate prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man iterates, while these forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For movement, for an ampler sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierce Fate’s impenetrable ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not milder is the general lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because our spirits have forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In action’s dizzying eddy whirl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The something that infects the world.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-forsaken-merman" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Forsaken Merman</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Come, dear children, let us away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down and away below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now my brothers call from the bay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the great winds shoreward blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the salt tides seawards flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the wild white horses play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Champ and chafe and toss in the spray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Children dear, let us away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This way, this way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Call her once before you go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call once yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a voice that she will know:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Margaret! Margaret!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Children’s voices should be dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Call once more) to a mother’s ear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Children’s voices, wild with pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely she will come again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call her once and come away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This way, this way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mother dear, we cannot stay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wild white horses foam and fret.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Margaret! Margaret!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Come, dear children, come away down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One last look at the white-wall’d town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the little grey church on the windy shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then come down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will not come though you call all day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come away, come away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Children dear, was it yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We heard the sweet bells over the bay?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the caverns where we lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the surf and through the swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The far-off sound of a silver bell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sand-strewn caverns, cool and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the winds are all asleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the spent lights quiver and gleam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the salt weed sways in the stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the sea-beasts, rang’d all round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed in the ooze of their pasture-ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the sea-snakes coil and twine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dry their mail and bask in the brine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where great whales come sailing by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail and sail, with unshut eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the world for ever and aye?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When did music come this way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Children dear, was it yesterday?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Children dear, was it yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Call yet once) that she went away?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once she sate with you and me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a red gold throne in the heart of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the youngest sate on her knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She comb’d its bright hair, and she tended it well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When down swung the sound of a far-off bell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sigh’d, she look’d up through the clear green sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She said; “I must go, for my kinsfolk pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the little grey church on the shore to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill be Easter-time in the world⁠—ah me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I lose my poor soul, Merman, here with thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said; “Go up, dear heart, through the waves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say thy prayer, and come back to the kind sea-caves.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She smil’d, she went up through the surf in the bay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Children dear, was it yesterday?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Children dear, were we long alone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The sea grows stormy, the little ones moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long prayers,” I said, “in the world they say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come!” I said, and we rose through the surf in the bay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We went up the beach, by the sandy down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the sea-stocks bloom, to the white-wall’d town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the narrow pav’d streets, where all was still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the little grey church on the windy hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the church came a murmur of folk at their prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we stood without in the cold blowing airs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We climb’d on the graves, on the stones, worn with rains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we gaz’d up the aisle through the small leaded panes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sate by the pillar; we saw her clear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Margaret, hist! come quick, we are here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear heart,” I said, “we are long alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea grows stormy, the little ones moan.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, ah, she gave me never a look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her eyes were seal’d to the holy book.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Loud prays the priest; shut stands the door.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come away, children, call no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come away, come down, call no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Down, down, down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the depths of the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sits at her wheel in the humming town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing most joyfully.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hark, what she sings; “O joy, O joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the humming street, and the child with its toy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the priest, and the bell, and the holy well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the wheel where I spun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blessed light of the sun.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so she sings her fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing most joyfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the shuttle falls from her hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the whizzing wheel stands still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She steals to the window, and looks at the sand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over the sand at the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her eyes are set in a stare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anon there breaks a sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anon there drops a tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a sorrow-clouded eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a heart sorrow-laden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long, long sigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the cold strange eyes of a little Mermaiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the gleam of her golden hair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Come away, away children.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come children, come down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hoarse wind blows colder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lights shine in the town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will start from her slumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When gusts shake the door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will hear the winds howling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will hear the waves roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shall see, while above us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves roar and whirl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ceiling of amber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pavement of pearl.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing, “Here came a mortal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But faithless was she.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And alone dwell for ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kings of the sea.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, children, at midnight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When soft the winds blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When clear falls the moonlight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When spring tides are low:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sweet airs come seaward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heaths starr’d with broom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And high rocks throw mildly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blanch’d sands a gloom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up the still, glistening beaches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up the creeks we will hie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over banks of bright seaweed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ebb-tide leaves dry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will gaze, from the sand-hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the white, sleeping town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the church on the hill-side⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then come back down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing: “There dwells a lov’d one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cruel is she.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She left lonely for ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kings of the sea.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-world-and-the-quietist" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The World and the Quietist</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">To Critias</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>Why, when the World’s great mind</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>Hath finally inclin’d,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Why,</em> you say, Critias, <em>be debating still</em>?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>Why, with these mournful rhymes</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>Learn’d in more languid climes,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>Blame our activity,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>Who, with such passionate will,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2"><em>Are what we mean to be</em>?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Critias, long since, I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">(For Fate decreed it so),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since the World hath set its heart to live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Long since, with credulous zeal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">It turns Life’s mighty wheel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Still doth for labourers send,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Who still their labour give;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And still expects an end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Yet, as the wheel flies round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With no ungrateful sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do adverse voices fall on the World’s ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Deafen’d by his own stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The rugged Labourer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Caught not till then a sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">So glowing and so near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Of his omnipotence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">So, when the feast grew loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In Susa’s palace proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white-rob’d slave stole to the Monarch’s side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He spoke: the Monarch heard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Felt the slow-rolling word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Swell his attentive soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Breath’d deeply as it died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And drain’d his mighty bowl.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-republican-friend-1848" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Republican Friend, 1848<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>God knows it, I am with you. If to prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those virtues, priz’d and practis’d by too few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But priz’d, but lov’d, but eminent in you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s fundamental life: if to despise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The barren optimistic sophistries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of comfortable moles, whom what they do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teaches the limit of the just and true⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for such doing have no need of eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If sadness at the long heart-wasting show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein earth’s great ones are disquieted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thoughts, not idle, while before me flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armies of the homeless and unfed:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If these are yours, if this is what you are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then am I yours, and what you feel, I share.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="continued" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Continued</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Yet, when I muse on what life is, I seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather to patience prompted, than that proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prospect of hope which France proclaims so loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>France, fam’d in all great arts, in none supreme.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing this Vale, this Earth, whereon we dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is on all sides o’ershadow’d by the high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uno’erleap’d Mountains of Necessity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparing us narrower margin than we deem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will that day dawn at a human nod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, bursting through the network superpos’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By selfish occupation⁠—plot and plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lust, avarice, envy⁠—liberated man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All difference with his fellow man compos’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be left standing face to face with God.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="religious-isolation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Religious Isolation</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">To the Same Friend</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Children (as such forgive them) have I known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever in their own eager pastime bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the incurious bystander, intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his own swarming thoughts, an interest own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too fearful or too fond to play alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do thou, whom light in thine own inmost soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Not less thy boast) illuminates, control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wishes unworthy of a man full-grown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What though the holy secret which moulds thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mould not the solid Earth? though never Winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have whisper’d it to the complaining Sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature’s great law, and law of all men’s minds?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To its own impulse every creature stirs:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Live by thy light, and Earth will live by hers!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-friend" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Friend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Who prop, thou ask’st, in these bad days, my mind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He much, the old man, who, clearest-soul’d of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw The Wide Prospect, and the Asian Fen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Tmolus’ hill, and Smyrna’s bay, though blind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much he, whose friendship I not long since won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That halting slave, who in Nicopolis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught Arrian, when Vespasian’s brutal son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear’d Rome of what most sham’d him. But be his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My special thanks, whose even-balanc’d soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From first youth tested up to extreme old age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Business could not make dull, nor Passion wild:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who saw life steadily, and saw it whole:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mellow glory of the Attic stage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singer of sweet Colonus, and its child.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="quiet-work" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Quiet Work</h2>
			<p>
				<span>One lesson, Nature, let me learn of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One lesson that in every wind is blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One lesson of two duties serv’d in one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the loud world proclaim their enmity⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Toil unsever’d from Tranquillity:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Labour, that in still advance outgrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far noisier schemes, accomplish’d in Repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too great for haste, too high for rivalry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, while on earth a thousand discords ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s senseless uproar mingling with his toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still do thy sleepless ministers move on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their glorious tasks in silence perfecting:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still working, blaming still our vain turmoil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labourers that shall not fail, when man is gone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-memory-picture" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Memory-Picture</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Laugh, my Friends, and without blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightly quit what lightly came:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich to-morrow as to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spend as madly as you may.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, with little land to stir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am the exacter labourer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the parting hour go by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But my Youth reminds me⁠—“Thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast liv’d light as these live now:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As these are, thou too wert such:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much hast had, hast squander’d much.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fortune’s now less frequent heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! I husband what’s grown rare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the parting hour go by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Young, I said: “A face is gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If too hotly mus’d upon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our best impressions are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those that do themselves repair.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a face I then let by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! is faded utterly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the parting hour go by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Marguerite says: “As last year went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the coming year’ll be spent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some day next year, I shall be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering heedless, kiss’d by thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! I hope⁠—yet, once away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What may chain us, who can say?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the parting hour go by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Paint that lilac kerchief, bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her soft face, her hair around:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tied under the archest chin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mockery ever ambush’d in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the fluttering fringes streak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All her pale, sweet-rounded cheek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the parting hour go by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Paint that figure’s pliant grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she towards me lean’d her face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half refus’d and half resign’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmuring, “Art thou still unkind?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a broken promise then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was new made⁠—to break again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the parting hour go by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Paint those eyes, so blue, so kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eager tell-tales of her mind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paint, with their impetuous stress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of inquiring tenderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those frank eyes, where deep doth lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An angelic gravity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the parting hour go by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What, my Friends, these feeble lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show, you say, my love declines?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To paint ill as I have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proves forgetfulness begun?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time’s gay minions, pleas’d you see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time, your master, governs me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pleased, you mock the fruitless cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Quick, thy tablets, Memory!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! too true. Time’s current strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaves us true to nothing long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, if little stays with man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! retain we all we can!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the clear impression dies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! the dim remembrance prize!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the parting hour go by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quick, thy tablets, Memory!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-modern-sappho" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Modern Sappho</h2>
			<p>
				<span>They are gone: all is still: Foolish heart, dost thou quiver?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing stirs on the lawn but the quick lilac shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far up gleams the house, and beneath flows the river.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here lean, my head, on this cold balustrade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ere he come: ere the boat, by the shining-branch’d border</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dark elms come round, dropping down the proud stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me pause, let me strive, in myself make some order,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere their boat-music sound, ere their broider’d flags gleam.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is it hope makes me linger? the dim thought, that sorrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Means parting? that only in absence lies pain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was well with me once if I saw him: to-morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May bring one of the old happy moments again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Last night we stood earnestly talking together⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She enter’d⁠—that moment his eyes turn’d from me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fasten’d on her dark hair and her wreath of white heather⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As yesterday was, so to-morrow will be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Their love, let me know, must grow strong and yet stronger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their passion burn more, ere it ceases to burn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They must love⁠—while they must: But the hearts that love longer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are rare: ah! most loves but flow once, and return.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I shall suffer; but they will outlive their affection:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall weep; but their love will be cooling: and he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he drifts to fatigue, discontent, and dejection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be brought, thou poor heart! how much nearer to thee!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For cold is his eye to mere beauty, who, breaking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong band which beauty around him hath furl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disenchanted by habit, and newly awaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks languidly round on a gloom-buried world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through that gloom he will see but a shadow appearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceive but a voice as I come to his side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But deeper their voice grows, and nobler their bearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose youth in the fires of anguish hath died.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then⁠—to wait. But what notes down the wind, hark! are driving?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis he! ’tis the boat, shooting round by the trees!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let my turn, if it will come, be swift in arriving!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! hope cannot long lighten torments like these.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hast thou yet dealt him, O Life, thy full measure?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>World, have thy children yet bow’d at his knee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou with myrtle-leaf crown’d him, O Pleasure?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crown, crown him quickly, and leave him for me.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="consolation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Consolation</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Mist clogs the sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoky dwarf houses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hem me round everywhere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A vague dejection</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weighs down my soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet, while I languish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everywhere, countless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prospects unroll themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And countless beings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass countless moods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Far hence, in Asia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the smooth convent-roofs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the gilt terraces</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of holy Lassa,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright shines the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grey time-worn marbles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold the pure Muses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their cool gallery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By yellow Tiber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They still look fair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Strange unlov’d uproar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrills round their portal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not on Helicon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kept they more cloudless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their noble calm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through sun-proof alleys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a lone, sand-hemm’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>City of Africa,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A blind, led beggar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Age-bow’d, asks alms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No bolder Robber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Erst abode ambush’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in the sandy waste:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No clearer eyesight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spied prey afar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Saharan sand-winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sear’d his keen eyeballs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spent is the spoil he won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him the present</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds only pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two young, fair lovers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the warm June wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh from the summer fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plays fondly round them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand, tranc’d in joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With sweet, join’d voices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with eyes brimming⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah,” they cry, “Destiny!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prolong the present!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time! stand still here!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prompt stern Goddess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shakes her head, frowning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time gives his hour-glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its due reversal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hour is gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With weak indulgence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did the just Goddess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lengthen their happiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She lengthen’d also</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distress elsewhere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The hour, whose happy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unalloy’d moments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would eternalize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ten thousand mourners</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well pleas’d see end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The bleak stern hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose severe moments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would annihilate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is pass’d by others</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In warmth, light, joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Time, so complain’d of,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who to no one man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shows partiality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brings round to all men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some undimm’d hours.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-to-the-hungarian-nation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Sonnet to the Hungarian Nation</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Examiner</i>, July 21, 1849</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Not in sunk Spain’s prolong’d death agony;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in rich England, bent but to make pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flood of the world’s commerce on her shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in that madhouse, France, from whence the cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afflicts grave Heaven with its long senseless roar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in American vulgarity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wordy German imbecility⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies any hope of heroism more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hungarians! Save the world! Renew the stories</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men who against hope repell’d the chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make the world’s dead spirit leap again!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On land renew that Greek exploit, whose glories</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hallow the Salaminian promontories,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Armada flung to the fierce main.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="switzerland" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Switzerland</h2>
			<section id="switzerland-1">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Meeting</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Again I see my bliss at hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The town, the lake are here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Marguerite smiles upon the strand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unalter’d with the year.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know that graceful figure fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cheek of languid hue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know that soft, enkerchief’d hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those sweet eyes of blue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Again I spring to make my choice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again in tones of ire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hear a God’s tremendous voice⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Be counsell’d, and retire!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye guiding Powers, who join and part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What would ye have with me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, warn some more ambitious heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the peaceful be!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="switzerland-2">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Parting</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">Ye storm-winds of Autumn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Who rush by, who shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The window, and ruffle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The gleam-lighted lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Who cross to the hill-side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Thin-sprinkled with farms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Where the high woods strip sadly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Their yellowing arms;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Ye are bound for the mountains⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Ah, with you let me go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Where your cold distant barrier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The vast range of snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Through the loose clouds lifts dimly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Its white peaks in air⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">How deep is their stillness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Ah! would I were there!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">But on the stairs what voice is this I hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Buoyant as morning, and as morning clear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say, has some wet bird-haunted English lawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lent it the music of its trees at dawn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or was it from some sun-fleck’d mountain-brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the sweet voice its upland clearness took?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Ah! it comes nearer⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Sweet notes, this way!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Hark! fast by the window</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The rushing winds go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">To the ice-cumber’d gorges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The vast seas of snow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">There the torrents drive upward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Their rock-strangled hum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">There the avalanche thunders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The hoarse torrent dumb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">—I come, O ye mountains!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Ye torrents, I come!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But who is this, by the half-open’d door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose figure casts a shadow on the floor?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sweet blue eyes⁠—the soft, ash-colour’d hair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cheeks that still their gentle paleness wear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lovely lips, with their arch smile, that tells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unconquer’d joy in which her spirit dwells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Ah! they bend nearer⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Sweet lips, this way!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Hark! the wind rushes past us⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ah! with that let me go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To the clear waning hill-side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Unspotted by snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There to watch, o’er the sunk vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The frore mountain wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Where the nich’d snow-bed sprays down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Its powdery fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There its dusky blue clusters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The aconite spreads;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There the pines slope, the cloud-strips</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hung soft in their heads.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">No life but, at moments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The mountain-bee’s hum.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">—I come, O ye mountains!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ye pine-woods, I come!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Forgive me! forgive me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Ah, Marguerite, fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Would these arms reach to clasp thee:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">But see! ’tis in vain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">In the void air towards thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">My strain’d arms are cast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But a sea rolls between us⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Our different past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">To the lips, ah! of others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Those lips have been prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And others, ere I was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Were clasp’d to that breast;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Far, far from each other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Our spirits have grown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And what heart knows another?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Ah! who knows his own?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Blow, ye winds! lift me with you!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">I come to the wild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fold closely, O Nature!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Thine arms round thy child.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">To thee only God granted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">A heart ever new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To all always open;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">To all always true.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Ah, calm me! restore me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And dry up my tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On thy high mountain platforms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Where Morn first appears,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Where the white mists, for ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Are spread and upfurl’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In the stir of the forces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Whence issued the world.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="switzerland-3">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">A Farewell</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>My horse’s feet beside the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sweet the unbroken moonbeams lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent echoes through the night to wake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each glistening strand, each heath-fring’d bay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The poplar avenue was pass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the roof’d bridge that spans the stream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up the steep street I hurried fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Led by thy taper’s starlike beam.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I came; I saw thee rise:⁠—the blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came flushing to thy languid cheek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lock’d in each other’s arms we stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tears, with hearts too full to speak.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Days flew: ah, soon I could discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A trouble in thine alter’d air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy hand lay languidly in mine⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy cheek was grave, thy speech grew rare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I blame thee not:⁠—this heart, I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be long lov’d was never fram’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For something in its depths doth glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too strange, too restless, too untam’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And women⁠—things that live and move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Min’d by the fever of the soul⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They seek to find in those they love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stern strength, and promise of control.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They ask not kindness, gentle ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These they themselves have tried and known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They ask a soul which never sways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the blind gusts that shake their own.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I too have felt the load I bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a too strong emotion’s sway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I too have wish’d, no woman more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This starting, feverish heart, away:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I too have long’d for trenchant force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will like a dividing spear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have prais’d the keen, unscrupulous course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which knows no doubt, which feels no fear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But in the world I learnt, what there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou too wilt surely one day prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That will, that energy, though rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are yet far, far less rare than love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Go, then! till Time and Fate impress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This truth on thee, be mine no more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They will: for thou, I feel, not less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than I, wast destin’d to this lore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We school our manners, act our parts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But He, who sees us through and through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knows that the bent of both our hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was to be gentle, tranquil, true.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And though we wear out life, alas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distracted as a homeless wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In beating where we must not pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In seeking what we shall not find;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet we shall one day gain, life past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clear prospect o’er our being’s whole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall see ourselves, and learn at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our true affinities of soul.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We shall not then deny a course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every thought the mass ignore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We shall not then call hardness force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor lightness wisdom any more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, in the eternal Father’s smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our sooth’d, encourag’d souls will dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To <em>seem</em> as free from pride and guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As good, as generous, as they <em>are</em>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then we shall know our friends: though much</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will have been lost⁠—the help in strife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thousand sweet still joys of such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hand in hand face earthly life;⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Though these be lost, there will be yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sympathy august and pure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ennobled by a vast regret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by contrition seal’d thrice sure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And we, whose ways were unlike here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May then more neighbouring courses ply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May to each other be brought near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greet across infinity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How sweet, unreach’d by earthly jars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sister! to behold with thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hush among the shining stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The calm upon the moonlit sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How sweet to feel, on the boon air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All our unquiet pulses cease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel that nothing can impair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gentleness, the thirst for peace⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The gentleness too rudely hurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this wild earth of hate and fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thirst for peace a raving world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would never let us satiate here.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="switzerland-4">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Isolation. To Marguerite</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>We were apart: yet, day by day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bade my heart more constant be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bade it keep the world away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grow a home for only thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor fear’d but thy love likewise grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like mine, each day more tried, more true.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fault was grave: I might have known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What far too soon, alas, I learn’d⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heart can bind itself alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And faith is often unreturn’d.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Self-sway’d our feelings ebb and swell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou lov’st no more: Farewell! Farewell!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Farewell! and thou, thou lonely heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which never yet without remorse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even for a moment did’st depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy remote and spherèd course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To haunt the place where passions reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to thy solitude again!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Back, with the conscious thrill of shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Luna felt, that summer night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flash through her pure immortal frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she forsook the starry height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hang over Endymion’s sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the pine-grown Latmian steep;⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet she, chaste queen, had never prov’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How vain a thing is mortal love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandering in Heaven, far remov’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou hast long had place to prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This truth⁠—to prove, and make thine own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<em>Thou hast been, shalt be, art, alone.</em>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or, if not quite alone, yet they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which touch thee are unmating things⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ocean, and Clouds, and Night, and Day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lorn Autumns and triumphant Springs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life, and others’ joy and pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love, if love, of happier men.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of happier men⁠—for they, at least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have <em>dream’d</em> two human hearts might blend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one, and were through faith releas’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From isolation without end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prolong’d, nor knew, although not less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone than thou, their loneliness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="switzerland-5">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">To Marguerite⁠—Continued</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Yes: in the sea of life enisl’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With echoing straits between us thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dotting the shoreless watery wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We mortal millions live <em>alone</em>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The islands feel the enclasping flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then their endless bounds they know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when the moon their hollows lights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they are swept by balms of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in their glens, on starry nights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nightingales divinely sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lovely notes, from shore to shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the sounds and channels pour;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh then a longing like despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is to their farthest caverns sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For surely once, they feel, we were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parts of a single continent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now round us spreads the watery plain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh might our marges meet again!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who order’d, that their longing’s fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should be, as soon as kindled, cool’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who renders vain their deep desire?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God, a God their severance rul’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade betwixt their shores to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unplumb’d, salt, estranging sea.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="switzerland-6">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Absence</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>In this fair stranger’s eyes of grey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eyes, my love, I see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shudder: for the passing day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had borne me far from thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This is the curse of life: that not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nobler calmer train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wiser thoughts and feelings blot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our passions from our brain;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But each day brings its petty dust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our soon-chok’d souls to fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we forget because we must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not because we will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I struggle towards the light; and ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once-long’d-for storms of love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If with the light ye cannot be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bear that ye remove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I struggle towards the light; but oh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While yet the night is chill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon Time’s barren, stormy flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay with me, Marguerite, still!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="switzerland-7">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Terrace at Berne</p>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">(Composed Ten Years After the Preceding)</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Ten years!⁠—and to my waking eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more the roofs of Berne appear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rocky banks, the terrace high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stream⁠—and do I linger here?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The clouds are on the Oberland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Jungfrau snows look faint and far;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bright are those green fields at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through those fields comes down the Aar,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And from the blue twin lakes it comes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flows by the town, the churchyard fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’neath the garden-walk it hums,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The house⁠—and is my Marguerite there?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, shall I see thee, while a flush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of startled pleasure floods thy brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick through the oleanders brush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clap thy hands, and cry: <em>’Tis thou!</em></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or hast thou long since wander’d back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daughter of France! to France, thy home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flitted down the flowery track</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where feet like thine too lightly come?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Doth riotous laughter now replace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy smile, and rouge, with stony glare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy cheek’s soft hue, and fluttering lace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kerchief that enwound thy hair?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or is it over?⁠—art thou dead?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead?⁠—and no warning shiver ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across my heart, to say thy thread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life was cut, and closed thy span!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Could from earth’s ways that figure slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be lost, and I not feel ’twas so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that fresh voice the gay delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fail from earth’s air, and I not know?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or shall I find thee still, but changed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not the Marguerite of thy prime?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all thy being re-arranged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass’d through the crucible of time;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With spirit vanish’d, beauty waned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hardly yet a glance, a tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gesture⁠—anything⁠—retain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all that was my Marguerite’s own?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I will not know!⁠—for wherefore try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To things by mortal course that live</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shadowy durability</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which they were not meant, to give?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like driftwood spars which meet and pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the boundless ocean-plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So on the sea of life, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man meets man, meets, and quits again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I knew it when my life was young;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel it still, now youth is o’er!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mists are on the mountains hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Marguerite I shall see no more.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="stanzas-in-memory-of-the-author-of-obermann" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Stanzas in Memory of the Author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Obermann</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a></h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">November, 1849</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In front the awful Alpine track</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crawls up its rocky stair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The autumn storm-winds drive the rack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close o’er it, in the air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Behind are the abandon’d baths<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mute in their meadows lone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leaves are on the valley-paths;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mists are on the Rhone⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The white mists rolling like a sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear the torrents roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Yes, Obermann, all speaks of thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel thee near once more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I turn thy leaves: I feel their breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more upon me roll;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That air of languor, cold, and death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which brooded o’er thy soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Fly hence, poor Wretch, whoe’er thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Condemn’d to cast about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All shipwreck in thy own weak heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For comfort from without:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">A fever in these pages burns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the calm they feign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wounded human spirit turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, on its bed of pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yes, though the virgin mountain air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh through these pages blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though to these leaves the glaciers spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul of their white snows,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Though here a mountain-murmur swells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many a dark-bough’d pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though, as you read, you hear the bells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the high-pasturing kine⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yet, through the hum of torrent lone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brooding mountain bee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There sobs I know not what ground tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human agony.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Is it for this, because the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is fraught too deep with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, Obermann! the world around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So little loves thy strain?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Some secrets may the poet tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the world loves new ways.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell too deep ones is not well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It knows not what he says.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yet of the spirits who have reign’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this our troubled day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know but two, who have attain’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save thee, to see their way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">By England’s lakes, in grey old age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His quiet home one keeps;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one, the strong much-toiling Sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In German Weimar sleeps.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But Wordsworth’s eyes avert their ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From half of human fate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Goethe’s course few sons of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May think to emulate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For he pursued a lonely road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes on Nature’s plan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither made man too much a God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor God too much a man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Strong was he, with a spirit free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mists, and sane, and clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clearer, how much! than ours: yet we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have a worse course to steer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For though his manhood bore the blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Europe’s stormiest time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in a tranquil world was pass’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tenderer youthful prime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But we, brought forth and rear’d in hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of change, alarm, surprise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What shelter to grow ripe is ours?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What leisure to grow wise?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Like children bathing on the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buried a wave beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second wave succeeds, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have had time to breathe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Too fast we live, too much are tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too harass’d, to attain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wordsworth’s sweet calm, or Goethe’s wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And luminous view to gain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And then we turn, thou sadder Sage!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee: we feel thy spell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hopeless tangle of our age⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou too hast scann’d it well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Immoveable thou sittest; still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As death; compos’d to bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy head is clear, thy feeling chill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And icy thy despair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yes, as the son of Thetis said,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear thee saying now⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Greater by far than thou art dead:</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Strive not: die also thou.⁠—</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Ah! two desires toss about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poet’s feverish blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One drives him to the world without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one to solitude.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1"><em>The glow</em>, he cries, <em>the thrill of life⁠—</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Where, where do these abound</em>?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in the world, not in the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, shall they be found.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He who hath watch’d, not shar’d, the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knows how the day hath gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He only lives with the world’s life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hath renounc’d his own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">To thee we come, then. Clouds are roll’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thou, O Seer, art set;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy realm of thought is drear and cold⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world is colder yet!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And thou hast pleasures too to share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those who come to thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balms floating on thy mountain air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And healing sights to see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">How often, where the slopes are green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Jaman, hast thou sate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By some high chalet door, and seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summer day grow late,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And darkness steal o’er the wet grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the pale crocus starr’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reach that glimmering sheet of glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the piny sward,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Lake Leman’s waters, far below:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watch’d the rosy light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fade from the distant peaks of snow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the air of night</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Heard accents of the eternal tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the pine branches play:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen’d, and felt thyself grow young;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen’d, and wept⁠—Away!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Away the dreams that but deceive!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, sad Guide, adieu!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go; Fate drives me: but I leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half of my life with you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">We, in some unknown Power’s employ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move on a rigorous line:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can neither, when we will, enjoy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor, when we will, resign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I in the world must live:⁠—but thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou melancholy Shade!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt not, if thou canst see me now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Condemn me, nor upbraid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For thou art gone away from earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And place with those dost claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Children of the Second Birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom the world could not tame;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And with that small, transfigur’d Band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom many a different way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conducted to their common land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou learn’st to think as they.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Christian and pagan, king and slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soldier and anchorite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distinctions we esteem so grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are nothing in their sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">They do not ask, who pin’d unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who was on action hurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose one bond is that all have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unspotted by the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There without anger thou wilt see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him who obeys thy spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more, so he but rest, like thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsoil’d:⁠—and so, Farewell!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Farewell!⁠—Whether thou now liest near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That much-lov’d inland sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ripples of whose blue waves cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vevey and Meillerie,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And in that gracious region bland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where with clear-rustling wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scented pines of Switzerland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand dark round thy green grave,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Between the dusty vineyard walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Issuing on that green place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The early peasant still recalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pensive stranger’s face,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And stoops to clear thy moss-grown date</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere he plods on again;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether, by maligner Fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the swarms of men,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Where between granite terraces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue Seine rolls her wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Capital of Pleasure sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hardly heard-of grave⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Farewell! Under the sky we part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the stern Alpine dell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O unstrung will! O broken heart!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A last, a last farewell!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="human-life" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Human Life</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What mortal, when he saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life’s voyage done, his heavenly Friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could ever yet dare tell him fearlessly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have kept uninfring’d my nature’s law;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inly-written chart thou gavest me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guide me, I have steer’d by to the end”?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! let us make no claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On life’s incognizable sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To too exact a steering of our way!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us not fret and fear to miss our aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If some fair coast have lured us to make stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or some friend hail’d us to keep company!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Aye, we would each fain drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At random, and not steer by rule!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weakness! and worse, weakness bestow’d in vain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winds from our side the unsuiting consort rive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We rush by coasts where we had lief remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man cannot, though he would, live chance’s fool.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No! as the foaming swathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of torn-up water, on the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls heavily away with long-drawn roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side the black deep-furrow’d path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut by an onward-labouring vessel’s prore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never touches the ship-side again;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even so we leave behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, charter’d by some unknown Powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We stem across the sea of life by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The joys which were not for our use design’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friends to whom we had no natural right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The homes that were not destined to be ours.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="courage" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Courage</h2>
			<p>
				<span>True, we must tame our rebel will:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True, we must bow to Nature’s law:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must bear in silence many an ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must learn to wail, renounce, withdraw.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet now, when boldest wills give place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Fate and Circumstance are strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in their rush the human race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are swept, like huddling sheep, along;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Those sterner spirits let me prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, though the tendence of the whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They less than us might recognize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept, more than us, their strength of soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, be the second Cato<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> prais’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not that he took the course to die⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that, when ’gainst himself he rais’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arm, he rais’d it dauntlessly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, Byron! let us dare admire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If not thy fierce and turbid song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet that, in anguish, doubt, desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy fiery courage still was strong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sun that on thy tossing pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did with such cold derision shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He crush’d thee not with his disdain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had his glow, and thou hadst thine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our bane, disguise it as we may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is weakness, is a faltering course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh that past times could give our day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Join’d to its clearness, of their force!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="self-dependence" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Self-Dependence</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Weary of myself, and sick of asking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I am, and what I ought to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At this vessel’s prow I stand, which bears me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forwards, forwards, o’er the starlit sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And a look of passionate desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the sea and to the stars I send:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ye who from my childhood up have calm’d me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm me, ah, compose me to the end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah, once more,” I cried, “ye Stars, ye Waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On my heart your mighty charm renew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, still let me, as I gaze upon you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel my soul becoming vast like you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From the intense, clear, star-sown vault of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the lit sea’s unquiet way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rustling night-air came the answer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wouldst thou <em>be</em> as these are? <em>Live</em> as they.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Unaffrighted by the silence round them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undistracted by the sights they see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These demand not that the things without them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield them love, amusement, sympathy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And with joy the stars perform their shining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sea its long moon-silver’d roll.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For alone they live, nor pine with noting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the fever of some differing soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bounded by themselves, and unobservant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In what state God’s other works may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their own tasks all their powers pouring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These attain the mighty life you see.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O air-born Voice! long since, severely clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cry like thine in mine own heart I hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Resolve to be thyself: and know, that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who finds himself, loses his misery.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="destiny" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Destiny</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Why each is striving, from of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love more deeply than he can?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still would be true, yet still grows cold?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Ask of the Powers that sport with man!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They yok’d in him, for endless strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heart of ice, a soul of fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hurl’d him on the Field of Life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An aimless unallay’d Desire.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="youths-agitations" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Youth’s Agitations</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When I shall be divorced, some ten years hence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this poor present self which I am now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When youth has done its tedious vain expense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of passions that for ever ebb and flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I not joy youth’s heats are left behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breathe more happy in an even clime?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah no! for then I shall begin to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand virtues in this hated time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I shall wish its agitations back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all its thwarting currents of desire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I shall praise the heat which then I lack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call this hurrying fever, generous fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sigh that one thing only has been lent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To youth and age in common⁠—discontent.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-worlds-triumphs" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The World’s Triumphs</h2>
			<p>
				<span>So far as I conceive the World’s rebuke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him address’d who would recast her new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not from herself her fame of strength she took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from their weakness, who would work her rue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Behold,” she cries, “so many rages lull’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many fiery spirits quite cool’d down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look how so many valours, long undull’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After short commerce with me, fear my frown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou too, when thou against my crimes wouldst cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy foreboded homage check thy tongue.”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The World speaks well: yet might her foe reply⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Are wills so weak? then let not mine wait long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou so rare a poison? let me be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keener to slay thee, lest thou poison me.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="empedocles-on-etna" epub:type="z3998:drama">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Empedocles on Etna</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Dramatic Poem</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="empedocles-on-etna-dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Persons</h3>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>Empedocles</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Pausanias, a Physician</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Callicles, a young Harp-player</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>The Scene of the Poem is on Mount Etna; at first in the forest region, afterwards on the summit of the mountain.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="empedocles-on-etna-act-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<section id="empedocles-on-etna-scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
					<h4>
						<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h4>
					<p>A Pass in the forest region of Etna. Morning.</p>
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</td>
								<td>
									<p>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alone, resting on a rock by the path.</i>
									</p>
									<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
										<p>
											<span>The mules, I think, will not be here this hour.</span>
											<br/>
											<span>They feel the cool wet turf under their feet</span>
											<br/>
											<span>By the stream-side, after the dusty lanes</span>
											<br/>
											<span>In which they have toil’d all night from Catana,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>And scarcely will they budge a yard. O Pan!</span>
											<br/>
											<span>How gracious is the mountain at this hour!</span>
											<br/>
											<span>A thousand times have I been here alone</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Or with the revellers from the mountain towns,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>But never on so fair a morn;⁠—the sun</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Is shining on the brilliant mountain crests,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>And on the highest pines: but further down</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Here in the valley is in shade; the sward</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Is dark, and on the stream the mist still hangs;</span>
											<br/>
											<span>One sees one’s foot-prints crush’d in the wet grass,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>One’s breath curls in the air; and on these pines</span>
											<br/>
											<span>That climb from the stream’s edge, the long grey tufts,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Which the goats love, are jewell’d thick with dew.</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Here will I stay till the slow litter comes.</span>
											<br/>
											<span>I have my harp too⁠—that is well.⁠—Apollo!</span>
											<br/>
											<span>What mortal could be sick or sorry here?</span>
											<br/>
											<span>I know not in what mind Empedocles,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Whose mules I follow’d, may be coming up,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>But if, as most men say, he is half mad</span>
											<br/>
											<span>With exile, and with brooding on his wrongs,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Pausanias, his sage friend, who mounts with him,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Could scarce have lighted on a lovelier cure.</span>
											<br/>
											<span>The mules must be below, far down. I hear</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Their tinkling bells, mix’d with the song of birds,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Rise faintly to me⁠—now it stops!⁠—Who’s here?</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Pausanias! and on foot? alone?</span>
										</p>
									</div>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>And thou, then?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I left thee supping with Peisianax,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With thy head full of wine, and thy hair crown’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Touching thy harp as the whim came on thee,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And prais’d and spoil’d by master and by guests</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Almost as much as the new dancing girl.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Why hast thou follow’d us?</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>The night was hot,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the feast past its prime; so we slipp’d out,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Some of us, to the portico to breathe;⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Peisianax, thou know’st, drinks late;⁠—and then,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As I was lifting my soil’d garland off,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I saw the mules and litter in the court,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And in the litter sate Empedocles;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou, too, wert with him. Straightway I sped home;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I saddled my white mule, and all night long</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Through the cool lovely country follow’d you,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Pass’d you a little since as morning dawn’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And have this hour sate by the torrent here,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Till the slow mules should climb in sight again.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And now?</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>And now, back to the town with speed!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Crouch in the wood first, till the mules have pass’d;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>They do but halt, they will be here anon.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou must be viewless to Empedocles;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Save mine, he must not meet a human eye.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>One of his moods is on him that thou know’st.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I think, thou would’st not vex him.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>No⁠—and yet</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I would fain stay and help thee tend him; once</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He knew me well, and would oft notice me.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And still, I know not how, he draws me to him,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And I could watch him with his proud sad face,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>His flowing locks and gold-encircled brow</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And kingly gait, for ever; such a spell</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In his severe looks, such a majesty</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As drew of old the people after him,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In Agrigentum and Olympia,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When his star reign’d, before his banishment,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Is potent still on me in his decline.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But oh, Pausanias, he is changed of late!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>There is a settled trouble in his air</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Admits no momentary brightening now;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And when he comes among his friends at feasts,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>’Tis as an orphan among prosperous boys.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou know’st of old he loved this harp of mine,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When first he sojourn’d with Peisianax;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He is now always moody, and I fear him.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But I would serve him, soothe him, if I could,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Dared one but try.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Thou wert a kind child ever.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He loves thee, but he must not see thee now.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou hast indeed a rare touch on thy harp,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He loves that in thee, too; there was a time</span>
										<br/>
										<span>(But that is pass’d) he would have paid thy strain</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With music to have drawn the stars from heaven.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He hath his harp and laurel with him still,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But he has laid the use of music by,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And all which might relax his settled gloom.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Yet thou may’st try thy playing if thou wilt,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But thou must keep unseen; follow us on,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But at a distance! in these solitudes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In this clear mountain air, a voice will rise,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Though from afar, distinctly; it may soothe him.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Play when we halt, and, when the evening comes</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And I must leave him (for his pleasure is</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To be left musing these soft nights alone</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the high unfrequented mountain-spots),</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Then watch him, for he ranges swift and far,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sometimes to Etna’s top, and to the cone;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But hide thee in the rocks a great way down,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And try thy noblest strains, my Callicles,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With the sweet night to help thy harmony.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou wilt earn my thanks sure, and perhaps his.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>More than a day and night, Pausanias,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of this fair summer weather, on these hills,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Would I bestow to help Empedocles.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That needs no thanks; one is far better here</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Than in the broiling city in these heats.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But tell me, how hast thou persuaded him</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In this his present fierce, man-hating mood,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To bring thee out with him alone on Etna?</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Thou hast heard all men speaking of Pantheia,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The woman who at Agrigentum lay</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thirty long days in a cold trance of death,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And whom Empedocles call’d back to life.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou art too young to note it, but his power</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Swells with the swelling evil of this time,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And holds men mute to see where it will rise.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He could stay swift diseases in old days,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Chain madmen by the music of his lyre,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Cleanse to sweet airs the breath of poisonous streams,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And in the mountain chinks inter the winds.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>This he could do of old; but now, since all</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Clouds and grows daily worse in Sicily,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Since broils tear us in twain, since this new swarm</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of sophists has got empire in our schools</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Where he was paramount, since he is banish’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And lives a lonely man in triple gloom,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He grasps the very reins of life and death.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I ask’d him of Pantheia yesterday,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When we were gather’d with Peisianax,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And he made answer, I should come at night</span>
										<br/>
										<span>On Etna here, and be alone with him,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And he would tell me, as his old, tried friend,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Who still was faithful, what might profit me;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That is, the secret of this miracle.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Bah! Thou a doctor! Thou art superstitious.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Simple Pausanias, ’twas no miracle!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Pantheia, for I know her kinsmen well,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Was subject to these trances from a girl.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Empedocles would say so, did he deign;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But he still lets the people, whom he scorns,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Gape and cry wizard at him, if they list.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But thou, thou art no company for him;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou art as cross, as soured as himself.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou hast some wrong from thine own citizens,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And then thy friend is banish’d, and on that,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Straightway thou fallest to arraign the times,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As if the sky was impious not to fall.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The sophists are no enemies of his;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I hear, Gorgias, their chief, speaks nobly of him,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As of his gifted master and once friend.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He is too scornful, too high-wrought, too bitter.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>’Tis not the times, ’tis not the sophists vex him;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>There is some root of suffering in himself,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Some secret and unfollow’d vein of woe,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Which makes the time look black and sad to him.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Pester him not in this his sombre mood</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With questionings about an idle tale,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But lead him through the lovely mountain paths,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And keep his mind from preying on itself,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And talk to him of things at hand and common,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Not miracles; thou art a learned man,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But credulous of fables as a girl.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>And thou, a boy whose tongue outruns his knowledge,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And on whose lightness blame is thrown away.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Enough of this! I see the litter wind</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Up by the torrent-side, under the pines.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I must rejoin Empedocles. Do thou</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Crouch in the brush-wood till the mules have pass’d;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Then play thy kind part well. Farewell till night!</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
				</section>
				<section id="empedocles-on-etna-scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
					<h4>
						<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h4>
					<p>Noon. A Glen on the highest skirts of the woody region of Etna.</p>
					<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</b>.</p>
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>The noon is hot; when we have cross’d the stream</span>
										<br/>
										<span>We shall have left the woody tract, and come</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Upon the open shoulder of the hill.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>See how the giant spires of yellow bloom</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of the sun-loving gentian, in the heat,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Are shining on those naked slopes like flame!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Let us rest here; and now, Empedocles,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Pantheia’s history. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A harp-note below is heard.</i></span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Hark! what sound was that</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Rose from below? If it were possible,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And we were not so far from human haunt,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I should have said that some one touch’d a harp.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hark! there again!</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>’Tis the boy Callicles,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The sweetest harp-player in Catana,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He is for ever coming on these hills,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In summer, to all country-festivals,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With a gay revelling band; he breaks from them</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sometimes, and wanders far among the glens.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But heed him not, he will not mount to us;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I spoke with him this morning. Once more, therefore,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Instruct me of Pantheia’s story, Master,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As I have pray’d thee.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
								<td>That? and to what end?</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>It is enough that all men speak of it.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But I will also say, that when the Gods</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Visit us as they do with sign and plague,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To know those spells of time that stay their hand</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Were to live free from terror.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Spells? Mistrust them.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Mind is the spell which governs earth and heaven.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Man has a mind with which to plan his safety;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Know that, and help thyself.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>But thy own words?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>“The wit and counsel of man was never clear,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Troubles confound the little wit he has.”</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Mind is a light which the Gods mock us with,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To lead those false who trust it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The harp sounds again.</i></span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Hist! once more!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Listen, Pausanias!⁠—Aye, ’tis Callicles!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I know these notes among a thousand. Hark!</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</td>
								<td>
									<p>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sings unseen, from below.</i>
									</p>
									<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
										<p>
											<span>The track winds down to the clear stream,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>To cross the sparkling shallows; there</span>
											<br/>
											<span>The cattle love to gather, on their way</span>
											<br/>
											<span>To the high mountain pastures, and to stay,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Till the rough cow-herds drive them past,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Knee-deep in the cool ford; for ’tis the last</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Of all the woody, high, well-water’d dells</span>
											<br/>
											<span>On Etna; and the beam</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Of noon is broken there by chestnut boughs</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Down its steep verdant sides; the air</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Is freshen’d by the leaping stream, which throws</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Eternal showers of spray on the moss’d roots</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Of trees, and veins of turf, and long dark shoots</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Of ivy-plants, and fragrant hanging bells</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Of hyacinths, and on late anemonies,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>That muffle its wet banks; but glade,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>And stream, and sward, and chestnut trees,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>End here; Etna beyond, in the broad glare</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Of the hot noon, without a shade,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Slope behind slope, up to the peak, lies bare;</span>
											<br/>
											<span>The peak, round which the white clouds play.</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">In such a glen, on such a day,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">On Pelion, on the grassy ground,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">Chiron, the aged Centaur, lay,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">The young Achilles standing by.</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">The Centaur taught him to explore</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">The mountains; where the glens are dry,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">And the tired Centaurs come to rest,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">And where the soaking springs abound,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">And the straight ashes grow for spears,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">And where the hill-goats come to feed,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">And the sea-eagles build their nest.</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">He show’d him Phthia far away,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">And said: O boy, I taught this lore</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">To Peleus, in long distant years!</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">He told him of the Gods, the stars,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">The tides;⁠—and then of mortal wars,</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">And of the life which heroes lead</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">Before they reach the Elysian place</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">And rest in the immortal mead;</span>
											<br/>
											<span class="i3">And all the wisdom of his race.</span>
										</p>
									</div>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The music below ceases, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</b> speaks, accompanying himself in a solemn manner on his harp.</i>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">The out-spread world to span</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A cord the Gods first slung,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And then the soul of man</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">There, like a mirror, hung,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And bade the winds through space impel the gusty toy.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Hither and thither spins</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The wind-borne mirroring soul,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A thousand glimpses wins,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And never sees a whole;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Looks once, and drives elsewhere, and leaves its last employ.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">The Gods laugh in their sleeve</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To watch man doubt and fear,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Who knows not what to believe</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Since he sees nothing clear,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And dares stamp nothing false where he finds nothing sure.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Is this, Pausanias, so?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And can our souls not strive,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">But with the winds must go,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And hurry where they drive?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Is Fate indeed so strong, man’s strength indeed so poor?</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">I will not judge! that man,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Howbeit, I judge as lost,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Whose mind allows a plan</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Which would degrade it most;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And he treats doubt the best who tries to see least ill.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Be not, then, fear’s blind slave!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Thou art my friend; to thee,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">All knowledge that I have,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">All skill I wield, are free;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ask not the latest news of the last miracle,</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Ask not what days and nights</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">In trance Pantheia lay,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">But ask how thou such sights</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">May’st see without dismay;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ask what most helps when known, thou son of Anchitus!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">What? hate, and awe, and shame</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Fill thee to see our world;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Thou feelest thy soul’s frame</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Shaken and rudely hurl’d.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>What? life and chance go hard with thee too, as with us;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Thy citizens, ’tis said,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Envy thee and oppress,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Thy goodness no men aid,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">All strive to make it less;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Tyranny, pride, and lust fill Sicily’s abodes;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Heaven is with earth at strife,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Signs make thy soul afraid,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The dead return to life,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Rivers are dried, winds stay’d;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Scarce can one think in calm, so threatening are the Gods;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">And we feel, day and night,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The burden of ourselves⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Well, then, the wiser wight</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">In his own bosom delves,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And asks what ails him so, and gets what cure he can.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">The sophist sneers: Fool, take</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Thy pleasure, right or wrong!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The pious wail: Forsake</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A world these sophists throng!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Be neither saint nor sophist-led, but be a man.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">These hundred doctors try</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To preach thee to their school.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We have the truth! they cry.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And yet their oracle,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Trumpet it as they will, is but the same as thine.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Once read thy own breast right,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And thou hast done with fears!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Man gets no other light,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Search he a thousand years.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sink in thyself! there ask what ails thee, at that shrine!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">What makes thee struggle and rave?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Why are men ill at ease?⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">’Tis that the lot they have</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Fails their own will to please;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For man would make no murmuring, were his will obey’d.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">And why is it, that still</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Man with his lot thus fights?⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">’Tis that he makes this <em>will</em></span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The measure of his <em>rights</em>,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And believes Nature outraged if his will’s gainsaid.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Couldst thou, Pausanias, learn</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">How deep a fault is this!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Couldst thou but once discern</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Thou hast no <em>right</em> to bliss,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>No title from the Gods to welfare and repose;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Then thou wouldst look less mazed</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Whene’er of bliss debarr’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Nor think the Gods were crazed</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">When thy own lot went hard.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But we are all the same⁠—the fools of our own woes!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">For, from the first faint morn</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of life, the thirst for bliss</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Deep in man’s heart is born;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And, sceptic as he is,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He fails not to judge clear if this be quench’d or no.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Nor is the thirst to blame!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Man errs not that he deems</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">His welfare his true aim,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">He errs because he dreams</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The world does but exist that welfare to bestow.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">We mortals are no kings</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For each of whom to sway</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A new-made world up-springs</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Meant merely for his play;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>No, we are strangers here; the world is from of old.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">In vain our pent wills fret,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And would the world subdue.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Limits we did not set</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Condition all we do;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Born into life we are, and life must be our mould.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Born into life⁠—man grows</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Forth from his parents’ stem,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And blends their bloods, as those</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of theirs are blent in them;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>So each new man strikes root into a far fore-time.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Born into life⁠—we bring</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A bias with us here,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And, when here, each new thing</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Affects us we come near;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To tunes we did not call our being must keep chime.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Born into life⁠—in vain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Opinions, those or these,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Unalter’d to retain</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The obstinate mind decrees;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Experience, like a sea, soaks all-effacing in.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Born into life⁠—who lists</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">May what is false hold dear,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And for himself make mists</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Through which to see less clear;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The world is what it is, for all our dust and din.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Born into life⁠—’tis we,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And not the world, are new.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Our cry for bliss, our plea,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Others have urged it too;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Our wants have all been felt, our errors made before.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">No eye could be too sound</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To observe a world so vast,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">No patience too profound</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To sort what’s here amass’d;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>How man may here best live no care too great to explore.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">But we⁠—as some rude guest</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Would change, where’er he roam,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The manners there profess’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To those he brings from home⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>We mark not the world’s course, but would have <em>it</em> take <em>ours</em>.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">The world’s course proves the terms</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">On which man wins content;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Reason the proof confirms;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We spurn it, and invent</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A false course for the world, and for ourselves, false powers.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Riches we wish to get,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Yet remain spendthrifts still;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We would have health, and yet</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Still use our bodies ill;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Bafflers of our own prayers, from youth to life’s last scenes.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">We would have inward peace,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Yet will not look within;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We would have misery cease,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Yet will not cease from sin;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>We want all pleasant ends, but will use no harsh means;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">We do not what we ought,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">What we ought not, we do,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And lean upon the thought</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">That chance will bring us through;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But our own acts, for good or ill, are mightier powers.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Yet, even when man forsakes</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">All sin⁠—is just, is pure,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Abandons all which makes</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">His welfare insecure⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Other existences there are, that clash with ours.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Like us, the lightning fires</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Love to have scope and play;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The stream, like us, desires</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">An unimpeded way;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Like us, the Libyan wind delights to roam at large.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Streams will not curb their pride</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The just man not to entomb,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Nor lightnings go aside</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To give his virtues room;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Nor is that wind less rough which blows a good man’s barge.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Nature, with equal mind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Sees all her sons at play;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Sees man control the wind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The wind sweep man away;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Allows the proudly-riding and the founder’d bark.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">And, lastly, though of ours</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">No weakness spoil our lot,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Though the non-human powers</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of Nature harm us not,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The ill deeds of other men make often <em>our</em> life dark.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">What were the wise man’s plan?⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Through this sharp, toil-set life,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To fight as best he can,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And win what’s won by strife.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But we an easier way to cheat our pains have found.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Scratch’d by a fall, with moans</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">As children of weak age</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Lend life to the dumb stones</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Whereon to vent their rage,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And bend their little fists, and rate the senseless ground;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">So, loath to suffer mute,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We, peopling the void air,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Make Gods to whom to impute</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The ills we ought to bear;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With God and Fate to rail at, suffering easily.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Yet grant⁠—as sense long miss’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Things that are now perceiv’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And much may still exist</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Which is not yet believ’d⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Grant that the world were full of Gods we cannot see;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">All things the world which fill</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of but one stuff are spun,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">That we who rail are still,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">With what we rail at, one;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>One with the o’erlabour’d Power that through the breadth and length</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Of earth, and air, and sea,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">In men, and plants, and stones,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Hath toil perpetually,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And travails, pants, and moans;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fain would do all things well, but sometimes fails in strength.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">And patiently exact</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">This universal God</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Alike to any act</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Proceeds at any nod,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And quietly declaims the cursings of himself.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">This is not what man hates,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Yet he can curse but this.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Harsh Gods and hostile Fates</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Are dreams! this only <em>is</em>;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Is everywhere; sustains the wise, the foolish elf.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Nor only, in the intent</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To attach blame elsewhere,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Do we at will invent</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Stern Powers who make their care</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To embitter human life, malignant Deities;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">But, next, we would reverse</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The scheme ourselves have spun,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And what we made to curse</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We now would lean upon,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And feign kind Gods who perfect what man vainly tries.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Look, the world tempts our eye,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And we would know it all!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We map the starry sky,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We mine this earthen ball,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>We measure the sea-tides, we number the sea-sands;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">We scrutinize the dates</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of long-past human things,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The bounds of effac’d states,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The lines of deceased kings;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>We search out dead men’s words, and works of dead men’s hands;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">We shut our eyes, and muse</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">How our own minds are made,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">What springs of thought they use,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">How righten’d, how betray’d;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And spend our wit to name what most employ unnam’d;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">But still, as we proceed</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The mass swells more and more</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of volumes yet to read,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of secrets yet to explore.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Our hair grows grey, our eyes are dimm’d, our heat is tamed.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">We rest our faculties,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And thus address the Gods:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">“True science if there is,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">It stays in your abodes;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Man’s measures cannot mete the immeasurable All;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">“You only can take in</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The world’s immense design,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Our desperate search was sin,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Which henceforth we resign,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sure only that <em>your</em> mind sees all things which befall!”</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Fools! That in man’s brief term</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">He cannot all things view,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Affords no ground to affirm</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">That there are Gods who do!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Nor does being weary prove that he has where to rest!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Again: our youthful blood</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Claims rapture as its right;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The world, a rolling flood</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of newness and delight,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Draws in the enamour’d gazer to its shining breast;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Pleasure, to our hot grasp,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Gives flowers after flowers,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">With passionate warmth we clasp</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Hand after hand in ours;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Now do we soon perceive how fast our youth is spent.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">At once our eyes grow clear;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We see, in blank dismay</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Year posting after year,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Sense after sense decay;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Our shivering heart is mined by secret discontent;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Yet still, in spite of truth,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">In spite of hopes entomb’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">That longing of our youth</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Burns ever unconsum’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Still hungrier for delight as delights grow more rare.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">We pause; we hush our heart,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And thus address the Gods:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">“The world hath fail’d to impart</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The joy our youth forebodes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fail’d to fill up the void which in our breasts we bear.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">“Changeful till now, we still</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Look’d on to something new;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Let us, with changeless will,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Henceforth look on to you,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To find with you the joy we in vain <em>here</em> require!”</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Fools! That so often here</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Happiness mock’d our prayer,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">I think, might make us fear</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A like event elsewhere!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Make us, not fly to dreams, but moderate desire!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">And yet, for those who know</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Themselves, who wisely take</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Their way through life, and bow</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To what they cannot break,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Why should I say that life need yield but <em>moderate</em> bliss?</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Shall we, with temper spoil’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Health sapp’d by living ill,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And judgment all embroil’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">By sadness and self-will,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Shall <em>we</em> judge what for man is not true bliss or is?</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Is it so small a thing</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To have enjoy’d the sun,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To have lived light in the spring,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To have loved, to have thought, to have done;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To have advanc’d true friends, and beat down baffling foes;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">That we must feign a bliss</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of doubtful future date,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And, while we dream on this,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Lose all our present state,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And relegate to worlds yet distant our repose?</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Not much, I know, you prize</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">What pleasures may be had,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Who look on life with eyes</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Estrang’d, like mine, and sad;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And yet the village churl feels the truth more than you,</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Who’s loath to leave this life</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Which to him little yields;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">His hard-task’d sunburnt wife,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">His often-labour’d fields,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The boors with whom he talk’d, the country spots he knew.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">But thou, because thou hear’st</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Men scoff at Heaven and Fate,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Because the Gods thou fear’st</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Fail to make blest thy state,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Tremblest, and wilt not dare to trust the joys there are.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">I say: Fear not! Life still</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Leaves human effort scope.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">But, since life teems with ill,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Nurse no extravagant hope;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Because thou must not dream, thou need’st not then despair!</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A long pause. At the end of it the notes of a harp below are again heard, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</b> sings:⁠—</i>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Far, far from here,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The Adriatic breaks in a warm bay</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Among the green Illyrian hills; and there</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The sunshine in the happy glens is fair,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And by the sea, and in the brakes.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The grass is cool, the sea-side air</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Buoyant and fresh, the mountain flowers</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As virginal and sweet as ours.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And there, they say, two bright and aged snakes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Who once were Cadmus and Harmonia,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Bask in the glens or on the warm sea-shore,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In breathless quiet, after all their ills.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Nor do they see their country, nor the place</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Where the Sphinx lived among the frowning hills,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Nor the unhappy palace of their race,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Nor Thebes, nor the Ismenus, any more.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>There those two live, far in the Illyrian brakes.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>They had stay’d long enough to see,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In Thebes, the billow of calamity</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Over their own dear children roll’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Curse upon curse, pang upon pang,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For years, they sitting helpless in their home,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A grey old man and woman; yet of old</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The Gods had to their marriage come,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And at the banquet all the Muses sang.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>Therefore they did not end their days</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In sight of blood; but were rapt, far away,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To where the west wind plays,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And murmurs of the Adriatic come</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To those untrodden mountain lawns; and there</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Placed safely in changed forms, the Pair</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Wholly forget their first sad life, and home,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And all that Theban woe, and stray</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For ever through the glens, placid and dumb.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>That was my harp-player again!⁠—where is he?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Down by the stream?</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td>Yes, Master, in the wood.</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>He ever loved the Theban story well!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But the day wears. Go now, Pausanias,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For I must be alone. Leave me one mule;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Take down with thee the rest to Catana.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And for young Callicles, thank him from me;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Tell him, I never fail’d to love his lyre:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But he must follow me no more to-night.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td>Thou wilt return to-morrow to the city?</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Either to-morrow or some other day,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the sure revolutions of the world,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Good friend, I shall revisit Catana.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I have seen many cities in my time,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Till mine eyes ache with the long spectacle,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And I shall doubtless see them all again;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou know’st me for a wanderer from of old.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Meanwhile, stay me not now. Farewell, Pausanias! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He departs on his way up the mountain.</i></span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pausanias</td>
								<td>
									<p>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alone.</i>
									</p>
									<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
										<p>
											<span>I dare not urge him further; he must go.</span>
											<br/>
											<span>But he is strangely wrought!⁠—I will speed back</span>
											<br/>
											<span>And bring Peisianax to him from the city;</span>
											<br/>
											<span>His counsel could once soothe him. But, Apollo!</span>
											<br/>
											<span>How his brow lighten’d as the music rose!</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Callicles must wait here, and play to him;</span>
											<br/>
											<span>I saw him through the chestnuts far below,</span>
											<br/>
											<span>Just since, down at the stream.⁠—Ho! Callicles! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He descends, calling.</i></span>
										</p>
									</div>
								</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="empedocles-on-etna-act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Evening. The Summit of Etna.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i11">Alone!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On this charr’d, blacken’d, melancholy waste,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Crown’d by the awful peak, Etna’s great mouth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Round which the sullen vapour rolls⁠—alone!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pausanias is far hence, and that is well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I must henceforth speak no more with man.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He has his lesson too, and that debt’s paid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the good, learned, friendly, quiet man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May bravelier front his life, and in himself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Find henceforth energy and heart; but I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The weary man, the banish’d citizen⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose banishment is not his greatest ill,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose weariness no energy can reach,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for whose hurt courage is not the cure⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What should I do with life and living more?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>No, thou art come too late, Empedocles!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the world hath the day, and must break thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not thou the world. With men thou canst not live,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their thoughts, their ways, their wishes, are not thine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And being lonely thou art miserable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For something has impair’d thy spirit’s strength,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dried its self-sufficing fount of joy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou canst not live with men nor with thyself⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O sage! O sage!⁠—Take then the one way left;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And turn thee to the elements, thy friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy well-tried friends, thy willing ministers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And say:⁠—Ye servants, hear Empedocles,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who asks this final service at your hands!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the sophist brood hath overlaid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The last spark of man’s consciousness with words⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere quite the being of man, ere quite the world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be disarray’d of their divinity⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the soul lose all her solemn joys,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And awe be dead, and hope impossible,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the soul’s deep eternal night come on⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive me, hide me, quench me, take me home!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He advances to the edge of the crater. Smoke and fire break forth with a loud noise, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</b> is heard below singing:⁠—</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The lyre’s voice is lovely everywhere!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the court of Gods, in the city of men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the lonely rock-strewn mountain glen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the still mountain air.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Only to Typho it sounds hatefully!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Typho only, the rebel o’erthrown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through whose heart Etna drives her roots of stone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To imbed them in the sea.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Wherefore dost thou groan so loud?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherefore do thy nostrils flash,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through the dark night, suddenly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Typho, such red jets of flame?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is thy tortur’d heart still proud?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is thy fire-scath’d arm still rash?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still alert thy stone-crush’d frame?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth thy fierce soul still deplore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thine ancient rout by the Cilician hills,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that curst treachery on the Mount of Gore?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do thy bloodshot eyes still weep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fight that crown’d thy ills,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy last defeat in this Sicilian sea?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou sworn, in thy sad lair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where erst the strong sea-currents suck’d thee down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never to cease to writhe, and try to sleep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Letting the sea-stream wander through thy hair?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thy groans, like thunder deep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Begin to roll, and almost drown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sweet notes, whose lulling spell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gods and the race of mortals love so well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When through thy caves thou hearest music swell?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i1">But an awful pleasure bland</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spreading o’er the Thunderer’s face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the sound climbs near his seat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Olympian council sees;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As he lets his lax right hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which the lightnings doth embrace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sink upon his mighty knees.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the eagle, at the beck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the appeasing gracious harmony,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Droops all his sheeny, brown, deep-feather’d neck,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nestling nearer to Jove’s feet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While o’er his sovereign eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The curtains of the blue films slowly meet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the white Olympus peaks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rosily brighten, and the sooth’d Gods smile</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At one another from their golden chairs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And no one round the charmèd circle speaks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Only the loved Hebe bears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cup about, whose draughts beguile</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pain and care, with a dark store</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of fresh-pull’d violets wreath’d and nodding o’er;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And her flush’d feet glow on the marble floor.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He fables, yet speaks truth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The brave impetuous heart yields everywhere</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the subtle, contriving head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Great qualities are trodden down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And littleness united</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is become invincible.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>These rumblings are not Typho’s groans, I know!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These angry smoke-bursts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are not the passionate breath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the mountain-crush’d, tortured, intractable Titan king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But over all the world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What suffering is there not seen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of plainness oppress’d by cunning,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As the well-counsell’d Zeus oppress’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That self-helping son of earth!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What anguish of greatness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rail’d and hunted from the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because its simplicity rebukes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This envious, miserable age!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am weary of it!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lie there, ye ensigns</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of my unloved pre-eminence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In an age like this!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Among a people of children,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who throng’d me in their cities,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who worshipp’d me in their houses,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ask’d, not wisdom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But drugs to charm with,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But spells to mutter⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All the fool’s-armoury of magic!⁠—Lie there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My golden circlet!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My purple robe!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">From below.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>As the sky-brightening south-wind clears the day,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And makes the mass’d clouds roll,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The music of the lyre blows away</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The clouds that wrap the soul.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>Oh, that Fate had let me see</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That triumph of the sweet persuasive lyre,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That famous, final victory</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When jealous Pan with Marsyas did conspire!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>When, from far Parnassus’ side,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Young Apollo, all the pride</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of the Phrygian flutes to tame,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To the Phrygian highlands came!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Where the long green reed-beds sway</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the rippled waters grey</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of that solitary lake</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Where Maeander’s springs are born;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Whence the ridg’d pine-wooded roots</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of Messogis westward break,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Mounting westward, high and higher.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>There was held the famous strife;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>There the Phrygian brought his flutes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And Apollo brought his lyre;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And, when now the westering sun</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Touch’d the hills, the strife was done,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the attentive Muses said:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>“Marsyas, thou art vanquished.”</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Then Apollo’s minister</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hang’d upon a branching fir</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Marsyas, that unhappy Faun,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And began to whet his knife.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But the Maenads, who were there,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Left their friend, and with robes flowing</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the wind, and loose dark hair</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O’er their polish’d bosoms blowing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Each her ribbon’d tambourine</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Flinging on the mountain sod,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With a lovely frighten’d mien</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Came about the youthful God.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But he turn’d his beauteous face</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Haughtily another way,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>From the grassy sun-warm’d place</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Where in proud repose he lay,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With one arm over his head,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Watching how the whetting sped.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>But aloof, on the lake strand,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Did the young Olympus stand,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Weeping at his master’s end;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For the Faun had been his friend.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For he taught him how to sing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And he taught him flute-playing.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Many a morning had they gone</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To the glimmering mountain lakes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And had torn up by the roots</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The tall crested water-reeds</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With long plumes, and soft brown seeds,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And had carved them into flutes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sitting on a tabled stone</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Where the shoreward ripple breaks.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And he taught him how to please</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The red-snooded Phrygian girls,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Whom the summer evening sees</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Flashing in the dance’s whirls</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Underneath the starlit trees</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the mountain villages.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Therefore now Olympus stands,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>At his master’s piteous cries</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Pressing fast with both his hands</span>
										<br/>
										<span>His white garment to his eyes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Not to see Apollo’s scorn;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ah, poor Faun, poor Faun! ah, poor Faun!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And lie thou there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My laurel bough!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scornful Apollo’s ensign, lie thou there!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though thou hast been my shade in the world’s heat⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though I have loved thee, lived in honouring thee⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet lie thou there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My laurel bough!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I am weary of thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am weary of the solitude</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where he who bears thee must abide!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the rocks of Parnassus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the gorge of Delphi,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the moonlit peaks, and the caves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou guardest them, Apollo!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over the grave of the slain Pytho,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though young, intolerably severe;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou keepest aloof the profane,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But the solitude oppresses thy votary!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The jars of men reach him not in thy valley⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But can life reach him?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou fencest him from the multitude⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who will fence him from himself?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hears nothing but the cry of the torrents,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the beating of his own heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The air is thin, the veins swell⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The temples tighten and throb there⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Air! air!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Take thy bough; set me free from my solitude!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have been enough alone!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Where shall thy votary fly then? back to men?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But they will gladly welcome him once more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And help him to unbend his too tense thought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rid him of the presence of himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And keep their friendly chatter at his ear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And haunt him, till the absence from himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That other torment, grow unbearable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he will fly to solitude again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he will find its air too keen for him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so change back; and many thousand times</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be miserably bandied to and fro</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a sea-wave, betwixt the world and thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou young, implacable God! and only death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can cut his oscillations short, and so</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bring him to poise. There is no other way.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And yet what days were those, Parmenides!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When we were young, when we could number friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all the Italian cities like ourselves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When with elated hearts we join’d your train,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye Sun-born Virgins! on the road of truth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then we could still enjoy, then neither thought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor outward things were clos’d and dead to us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But we receiv’d the shock of mighty thoughts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On simple minds with a pure natural joy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if the sacred load oppress’d our brain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We had the power to feel the pressure eased,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The brow unbound, the thoughts flow free again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the delightful commerce of the world.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We had not lost our balance then, nor grown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thought’s slaves, and dead to every natural joy!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The smallest thing could give us pleasure then!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sports of the country people,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A flute-note from the woods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sunset over the sea;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seed-time and harvest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The reapers in the corn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The vinedresser in his vineyard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The village-girl at her wheel!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Fullness of life and power of feeling, ye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are for the happy, for the souls at ease,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who dwell on a firm basis of content!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But he, who has outliv’d his prosperous days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But he, whose youth fell on a different world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From that on which his exiled age is thrown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose mind was fed on other food, was train’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By other rules than are in vogue to-day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose habit of thought is fix’d, who will not change,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in a world he loves not must subsist</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In ceaseless opposition, be the guard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of his own breast, fetter’d to what he guards,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That the world win no mastery over him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who has no friend, no fellow left, not one;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who has no minute’s breathing space allow’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To nurse his dwindling faculty of joy⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Joy and the outward world must die to him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As they are dead to me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A long pause, during which <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Empedocles</b> remains motionless, plunged in thought. The night deepens. He moves forward and gazes round him, and proceeds:⁠—</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And you, ye stars,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who slowly begin to marshal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As of old, in the fields of heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your distant, melancholy lines!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have <em>you</em>, too, survived yourselves?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are <em>you</em>, too, what I fear to become?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You, too, once lived!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You too moved joyfully</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Among august companions,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In an older world, peopled by Gods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In a mightier order,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The radiant, rejoicing, intelligent Sons of Heaven!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now, you kindle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your lonely, cold-shining lights,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unwilling lingerers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the heavenly wilderness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For a younger, ignoble world;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And renew, by necessity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Night after night your courses,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In echoing unnear’d silence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Above a race you know not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Uncaring and undelighted,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without friend and without home;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weary like us, though not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weary with our weariness.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>No, no, ye stars! there is no death with you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No languor, no decay! Languor and death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They are with me, not you! ye are alive!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye and the pure dark ether where ye ride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brilliant above me! And thou, fiery world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sapp’st the vitals of this terrible mount</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon whose charr’d and quaking crust I stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou, too, brimmest with life!⁠—the sea of cloud</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That heaves its white and billowy vapours up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To moat this isle of ashes from the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lives!⁠—and that other fainter sea, far down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O’er whose lit floor a road of moonbeams leads</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Etna’s Liparëan sister-fires</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the long dusky line of Italy⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That mild and luminous floor of waters lives,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With held-in joy swelling its heart!⁠—I only,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose spring of hope is dried, whose spirit has fail’d⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, who have not, like these, in solitude</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Maintain’d courage and force, and in myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nursed an immortal vigour⁠—I alone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am dead to life and joy; therefore I read</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all things my own deadness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A long silence. He continues:⁠—</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Oh, that I could glow like this mountain!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, that my heart bounded with the swell of the sea!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, that my soul were full of light as the stars!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, that it brooded over the world like the air!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>But no, this heart will glow no more! thou art</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A living man no more, Empedocles!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nothing but a devouring flame of thought⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But a naked, eternally restless mind!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">After a pause:⁠—</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To the elements it came from</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Everything will return.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our bodies to earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our blood to water,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heat to fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Breath to air.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They were well born, they will be well entomb’d!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But mind?⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And we might gladly share the fruitful stir</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Down in our mother earth’s miraculous womb!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well might it be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With what roll’d of us in the stormy main!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We might have joy, blent with the all-bathing air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or with the nimble radiant life of fire!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>But mind⁠—but thought⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If these have been the master part of us⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where will <em>they</em> find their parent element?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What will receive <em>them</em>, who will call <em>them</em> home?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But we shall still be in them, and they in us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we shall be the strangers of the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they will be our lords, as they are now;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And keep us prisoners of our consciousness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never let us clasp and feel the All</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But through their forms, and modes, and stifling veils.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we shall be unsatisfied as now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we shall feel the agony of thirst,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ineffable longing for the life of life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Baffled for ever: and still thought and mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will hurry us with them on their homeless march,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over the unallied unopening earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over the unrecognising sea; while air</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will blow us fiercely back to sea and earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fire repel us from its living waves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then we shall unwillingly return</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Back to this meadow of calamity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This uncongenial place, this human life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in our individual human state</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go through the sad probation all again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see if we will poise our life at last,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see if we will now at last be true</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To our own only true, deep-buried selves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being one with which we are one with the whole world;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or whether we will once more fall away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into some bondage of the flesh or mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some slough of sense, or some fantastic maze</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forged by the imperious lonely thinking-power.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And each succeeding age in which we are born</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will have more peril for us than the last;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will goad our senses with a sharper spur,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will fret our minds to an intenser play,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will make ourselves harder to be discern’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we shall struggle awhile, gasp and rebel;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we shall fly for refuge to past times,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their soul of unworn youth, their breath of greatness;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the reality will pluck us back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knead us in its hot hand, and change our nature.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we shall feel our powers of effort flag,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rally them for one last fight⁠—and fail;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we shall sink in the impossible strife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="dl2">
										<span>And be astray for ever.</span>
										<span>Slave of sense</span>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have in no wise been; but slave of thought?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And who can say:⁠—I have been always free,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lived ever in the light of my own soul?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot! I have lived in wrath and gloom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fierce, disputatious, ever at war with man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far from my own soul, far from warmth and light.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I have not grown easy in these bonds⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I have not denied what bonds these were!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, I take myself to witness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I have loved no darkness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sophisticated no truth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nursed no delusion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Allow’d no fear!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And therefore, O ye elements, I know⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye know it too⁠—it hath been granted me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not to die wholly, not to be all enslav’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I feel it in this hour! The numbing cloud</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mounts off my soul; I feel it, I breathe free!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Is it but for a moment?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah! boil up, ye vapours!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leap and roar, thou sea of fire!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My soul glows to meet you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere it flag, ere the mists</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of despondency and gloom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rush over it again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive me, save me! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He plunges into the crater.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Callicles</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">From below.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Through the black, rushing smoke-bursts,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thick breaks the red flame;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>All Etna heaves fiercely</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Her forest-cloth’d frame.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>Not here, O Apollo!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Are haunts meet for thee.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But, where Helicon breaks down</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In cliff to the sea,</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>Where the moon-silver’d inlets</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Send far their light voice</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Up the still vale of Thisbe,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O speed, and rejoice!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>On the sward at the cliff-top</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Lie strewn the white flocks;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>On the cliff-side the pigeons</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Roost deep in the rocks.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>In the moonlight the shepherds,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Soft lull’d by the rills,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Lie wrapt in their blankets,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Asleep on the hills.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—What forms are these coming</span>
										<br/>
										<span>So white through the gloom?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>What garments out-glistening</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The gold-flower’d broom?</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>What sweet-breathing presence</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Out-perfumes the thyme?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>What voices enrapture</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The night’s balmy prime?⁠—</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>’Tis Apollo comes leading</span>
										<br/>
										<span>His choir, the Nine.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—The leader is fairest,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But all are divine.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>They are lost in the hollows!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>They stream up again!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>What seeks on this mountain</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The glorified train?⁠—</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>They bathe on this mountain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the spring by their road;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Then on to Olympus,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Their endless abode!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—Whose praise do they mention?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of what is it told?⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>What will be for ever;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>What was from of old.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>First hymn they the Father</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of all things; and then,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The rest of immortals,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The action of men.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>The day in his hotness,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The strife with the palm;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The night in her silence,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The stars in their calm.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="lines-written-by-a-death-bed" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lines Written by a Death-Bed</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, now the longing is o’erpast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, dogg’d by fear and fought by shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook her weak bosom day and night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consum’d her beauty like a flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dimm’d it like the desert blast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though the curtains hide her face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet were it lifted to the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweet expression of her brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would charm the gazer, till his thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eras’d the ravages of time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill’d up the hollow cheek, and brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A freshness back as of her prime⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So healing is her quiet now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So perfectly the lines express</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tranquil, settled loveliness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her younger rival’s freshest grace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But ah, though peace indeed is here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ease from shame, and rest from fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though nothing can dismarble now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smoothness of that limpid brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet is a calm like this, in truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowning end of life and youth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when this boon rewards the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are all debts paid, has all been said?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And is the heart of youth so light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its step so firm, its eye so bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because on its hot brow there blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wind of promise and repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the far grave, to which it goes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because it has the hope to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One day, to harbour in the tomb?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah no, the bliss youth dreams is one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For daylight, for the cheerful sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For feeling nerbes and living breath⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth dreams a bliss on this side death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It dreams a rest, if not more deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More grateful than this marble sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It hears a voice within it tell⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Calm’s not life’s crown, though calm is well.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis all perhaps which man acquires:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis not what our youth desires.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="tristram-and-iseult" epub:type="z3998:poem z3998:drama">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Tristram and Iseult<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></h2>
			<section id="tristram-and-iseult-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Tristram</p>
				</hgroup>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is she not come? The messenger was sure.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prop me upon the pillows once again⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Raise me, my Page: this cannot long endure.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Christ! what a night! how the sleet whips the pane!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">What lights will those out to the northward be?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Page</td>
							<td>The lanterns of the fishing-boats at sea.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td>Soft⁠—who is that, stands by the dying fire?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Page</td>
							<td>Iseult.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td>Ah! not the Iseult I desire.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>What Knight is this so weak and pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though the locks are yet brown on his noble head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Propt on pillows in his bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing seawards for the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some ship that fights the gale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this wild December night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the sick man’s feet is spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dark green forest dress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gold harp leans against the bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruddy in the fire’s light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know him by his harp of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Famous in Arthur’s court of old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know him by his forest dress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The peerless hunter, harper, knight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tristram of Lyoness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What Lady is this, whose silk attire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gleams so rich in the light of the fire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ringlets on her shoulders lying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their flitting lustre vying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the clasp of burnish’d gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which her heavy robe doth hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her looks are mild, her fingers slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the driven snow are white;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But her cheeks are sunk and pale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is it that the bleak sea-gale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beating from the Atlantic sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this coast of Brittany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nips too keenly the sweet Flower?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is it that a deep fatigue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath come on her, a chilly fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passing all her youthful hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spinning with her maidens here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listlessly through the window bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing seawards many a league</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her lonely shore-built tower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the knights are at the wars?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or, perhaps, has her young heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt already some deeper smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those that in secret the heart-strings rive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving her sunk and pale, though fair?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who is this snowdrop by the sea?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know her by her mildness rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her snow-white hands, her golden hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know her by her rich silk dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her fragile loveliness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sweetest Christian soul alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iseult of Brittany.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Iseult of Brittany?⁠—but where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that other Iseult fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That proud, first Iseult, Cornwall’s queen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, whom Tristram’s ship of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Ireland to Cornwall bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Tyntagel, to the side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of King Marc, to be his bride?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She who, as they voyag’d, quaff’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Tristram that spic’d magic draught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which since then for ever rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through their blood, and binds their souls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Working love, but working teen?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There were two Iseults, who did sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each her hour of Tristram’s day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one possess’d his waning time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other his resplendent prime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold her here, the patient Flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who possess’d his darker hour!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iseult of the Snow-White Hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watches pale by Tristram’s bed.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is here who had his gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where art thou who hadst his bloom?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One such kiss as those of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might thy dying knight restore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does the love-draught work no more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou cold, or false, or dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Iseult of Ireland?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Loud howls the wind, sharp patters the rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the knight sinks back on his pillows again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is weak with fever and pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his spirit is not clear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hark! he mutters in his sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he wanders far from here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Changes place and time of year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his closèd eye doth sweep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er some fair unwintry sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not this fierce Atlantic deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he mutters brokenly⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The calm sea shines, loose hang the vessel’s sails⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before us are the sweet green fields of Wales,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And overhead the cloudless sky of May.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“<em>Ah, would I were in those green fields at play,</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Not pent on ship-board this delicious day.</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Tristram, I pray thee, of thy courtesy,</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Reach me my golden cup that stands by thee,</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span><em>And pledge me in it first for courtesy.</em>⁠—”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ha! dost thou start? are thy lips blanch’d like mine?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Child, ’tis no true draught this, ’tis poison’d wine!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Iseult!⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Ah, sweet angels, let him dream!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep his eyelids! let him seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not this fever-wasted wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinn’d and pal’d before his time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the brilliant youthful knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the glory of his prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting in the gilded barge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thy side, thou lovely charge!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bending gaily o’er thy hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iseult of Ireland!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she too, that princess fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If her bloom be now less rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let her have her youth again⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let her be as she was then!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let her have her proud dark eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her petulant quick replies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let her sweep her dazzling hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its gesture of command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shake back her raven hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the old imperious air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of old, so let her be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That first Iseult, princess bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chatting with her youthful knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he steers her o’er the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quitting at her father’s will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The green isle where she was bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her bower in Ireland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the surge-beat Cornish strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the prince whom she must wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwells on loud Tyntagel’s hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast beside the sounding sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that golden cup her mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave her, that her future lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave her, that King Marc and she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might drink it on their marriage day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for ever love each other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let her, as she sits on board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, sweet saints, unwittingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See it shine, and take it up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Tristram laughing say⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir Tristram, of thy courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pledge me in my golden cup!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let them drink it⁠—let their hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tremble, and their cheeks be flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they feel the fatal bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a love they dare not name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a wild delicious pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twine about their hearts again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the early summer be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more round them, and the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue, and o’er its mirror kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the breath of the May wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandering through their drooping sails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Die on the green fields of Wales.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let a dream like this restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What his eye must see no more.</span>
				</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Chill blows the wind, the pleasaunce walks are drear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Madcap, what jest was this, to meet me here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were feet like those made for so wild a way?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The southern winter-parlour, by my fay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had been the likeliest trysting-place to-day.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“<em>Tristram!⁠—nay, nay⁠—thou must not take my hand⁠—</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Tristram⁠—sweet love⁠—we are betray’d⁠—out-plann’d.</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Fly⁠—save thyself⁠—save me. I dare not stay.”⁠—</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One last kiss first!⁠—“<em>’Tis vain⁠—to horse⁠—away!</em>”</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, sweet saints, his dream doth move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faster surely than it should,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the fever in his blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the spring-time of his love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is already gone and past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And instead thereof is seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its winter, which endureth still⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tyntagel on its surge-beat hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pleasaunce-walks, the weeping queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flying leaves, the straining blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that long, wild kiss⁠—their last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this rough December night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his burning fever pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingle with his hurrying dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they rule it, till he seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The press’d fugitive again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love-desperate banish’d knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a fire in his brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flying o’er the stormy main.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whither does he wander now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply in his dreams the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wafts him here, and lets him find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lovely Orphan Child again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her castle by the coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youngest, fairest chatelaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom this realm of France can boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our snowdrop by the Atlantic sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iseult of Brittany.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And⁠—for through the haggard air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stain’d arms, the matted hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that stranger-knight ill-starr’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There gleam’d something, which recall’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Tristram who in better days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Launcelot’s guest at Joyous Gard⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Welcom’d here, and here install’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tended of his fever here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply he seems again to move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His young guardian’s heart with love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his exil’d loneliness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his stately, deep distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a word, without a tear.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, ’tis well he should retrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tranquil life in this lone place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His gentle bearing at the side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his timid youthful bride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His long rambles by the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On winter evenings, when the roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the near waves came, sadly grand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the dark, up the drown’d sand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or his endless reveries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the woods, where the gleams play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the grass under the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passing the long summer’s day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Idle as a mossy stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the forest depths alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chase neglected, and his hound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Couch’d beside him on the ground.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, what trouble’s on his brow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hither let him wander now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hither, to the quiet hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass’d among these heaths of ours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the grey Atlantic sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hours, if not of ecstasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From violent anguish surely free.</span>
				</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All red with blood the whirling river flows,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wide plain rings, the daz’d air throbs with blows.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon us are the chivalry of Rome⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their spears are down, their steeds are bath’d in foam.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Up, Tristram, up,” men cry, “thou moonstruck knight!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What foul fiend rides thee? On into the fight!”⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Above the din her voice is in my ears⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see her form glide through the crossing spears.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Iseult!⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, he wanders forth again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We cannot keep him; now as then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s a secret in his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That will never let him rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These musing fits in the green wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cloud the brain, they dull the blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sword is sharp⁠—his horse is good⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the mountains will he see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The famous towns of Italy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And label with the blessed sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heathen Saxons on the Rhine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Arthur’s side he fights once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the Roman Emperor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s many a gay knight where he goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will help him to forget his care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The march⁠—the leaguer⁠—Heaven’s blithe air⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The neighing steeds⁠—the ringing blows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sick pining comes not where these are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, what boots it, that the jest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lightens every other brow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What, that every other breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dances as the trumpets blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If one’s own heart beats not light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the waves of the toss’d fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If oneself cannot get free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the clog of misery?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy lovely youthful Wife grows pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watching by the salt sea tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her children at her side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the gleam of thy white sail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home, Tristram, to thy halls again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To our lonely sea complain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To our forests tell thy pain.</span>
				</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All round the forest sweeps off, black in shade,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But it is moonlight in the open glade:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the bottom of the glade shine clear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The forest chapel and the fountain near.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I think, I have a fever in my blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, let me leave the shadow of this wood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ride down, and bathe my hot brow in the flood.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Mild shines the cold spring in the moon’s clear light.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God! ’tis <em>her</em> face plays in the waters bright.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Fair love,” she says, “canst thou forget so soon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At this soft hour, under this sweet moon?”⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Iseult!⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Ah poor soul, if this be so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only death can balm thy woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The solitudes of the green wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had no medicine for thy mood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rushing battle clear’d thy blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As little as did solitude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, his eyelids slowly break</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hot seals, and let him wake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What new change shall we now see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A happier? Worse it cannot be.</span>
				</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is my Page here? Come, turn me to the fire.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the window panes the moon shines bright;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wind is down: but she’ll not come to-night.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah no⁠—she is asleep in Cornwall now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far hence⁠—her dreams are fair⁠—smooth is her brow.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of me she recks not, nor my vain desire.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I have had dreams, I have had dreams, my Page,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would take a score years from a strong man’s age;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with a blood like mine, will leave, I fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scant leisure for a second messenger.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">My Princess, art thou there? Sweet, ’tis too late.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bed, and sleep: my fever is gone by:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-night my Page shall keep me company.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where do the children sleep? kiss them for me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poor child, thou art almost as pale as I:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This comes of nursing long and watching late.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bed⁠—good night!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>She left the gleam-lit fire-place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She came to the bed-side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took his hands in hers: her tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down on her slender fingers rain’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rai’ed her eyes upon his face⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not with a look of wounded pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A look as if the heart complain’d:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her look was like a sad embrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gaze of one who can divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grief, and sympathize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Flower, thy children’s eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are not more innocent than thine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they sleep in shelter’d rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like helpless birds in the warm nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the Castle’s southern side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where feebly comes the mournful roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of buffeting wind and surging tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through many a room and corridor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full on their window the Moon’s ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes their chamber as bright as day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It shines upon the blank white walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the snowy pillow falls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on two angel-heads doth play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn’d to each other:⁠—the eyes clos’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lashes on the cheeks repos’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round each sweet brow the cap close-set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hardly lets peep the golden hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the soft-open’d lips the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarcely moves the coverlet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One little wandering arm is thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At random on the counterpane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often the fingers close in haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if their baby owner chas’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The butterflies again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This stir they have and this alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But else they are so still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, tired madcaps, you lie still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But were you at the window now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look forth on the fairy sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of your illumin’d haunts by night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the park-glades where you play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far lovelier than they are by day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the sparkle on the eaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And upon every giant bough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those old oaks, whose wet red leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are jewell’d with bright drops of rain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How would your voices run again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far beyond the sparkling trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the castle park one sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bare heaths spreading, clear as day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moor behind moor, far, far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the heart of Brittany.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here and there, lock’d by the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long inlets of smooth glittering sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a stretch of watery sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All shining in the white moon-beams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you see fairer in your dreams.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What voices are these on the clear night air?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What lights in the court? what steps on the stair?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="tristram-and-iseult-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Iseult of Ireland</p>
				</hgroup>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Raise the light, my Page! that I may see her.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Thou art come at last, then, haughty Queen!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Long I’ve waited, long I’ve fought my fever:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Late thou comest, cruel thou hast been.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Iseult</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Blame me not, poor sufferer, that I tarried:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I was bound, I could not break the band.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chide not with the past, but feel the present:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I am here⁠—we meet⁠—I hold thy hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou art come, indeed⁠—thou hast rejoin’d me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Thou hast dar’d it: but too late to save.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fear not now that men should tax thine honour.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I am dying: build⁠—(thou may’st)⁠—my grave!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Iseult</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tristram, for the love of Heaven, speak kindly!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">What, I hear these bitter words from thee?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sick with grief I am, and faint with travel⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Take my hand⁠—dear Tristram, look on me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I forgot, thou comest from thy voyage.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Yes, the spray is on thy cloak and hair.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thy dark eyes are not dimm’d, proud Iseult!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And thy beauty never was more fair.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Iseult</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, harsh flatterer! let alone my beauty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I, like thee, have left my youth afar.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take my hand, and touch these wasted fingers⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">See my cheek and lips, how white they are.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou art paler:⁠—but thy sweet charm, Iseult!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Would not fade with the dull years away.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, how fair thou standest in the moonlight!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I forgive thee, Iseult!⁠—thou wilt stay?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Iseult</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fear me not, I will be always with thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I will watch thee, tend thee, soothe thy pain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sing thee tales of true long-parted lovers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Join’d at evening of their days again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, thou shalt not speak; I should be finding</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Something alter’d in thy courtly tone.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sit⁠—sit by me: I will think, we’ve liv’d so</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In the green wood, all our lives, alone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Iseult</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alter’d, Tristram? Not in courts, believe me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Love like mine is alter’d in the breast.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Courtly life is light and cannot reach it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Ah, it lives, because so deep suppress’d.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Royal state with Marc, my deep-wrong’d husband⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">That was bliss to make my sorrows flee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Silken courtiers whispering honied nothings⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Those were friends to make me false to thee!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>What, thou think’st, men speak in courtly chambers</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Words by which the wretched are consol’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, thou think’st, this aching brow was cooler,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Circled, Tristram, by a band of gold?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Ah, on which, if both our lots were balanc’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Was indeed the heaviest burden thrown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thee, a weeping exile in thy forest⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Me, a smiling queen upon my throne?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Vain and strange debate, where both have suffer’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Both have pass’d a youth constrain’d and sad;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both have brought their anxious day to evening,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And have now short space for being glad.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Join’d we are henceforth: nor will thy people,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Nor thy younger Iseult take it ill,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That a former rival shares her office,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">When she sees her humbled, pale, and still.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I, a faded watcher by thy pillow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I, a statue on thy chapel floor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pour’d in grief before the Virgin Mother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Rouse no anger, make no rivals more.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>She will cry⁠—“Is this the foe I dreaded?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">This his idol? this that royal bride?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, an hour of health would purge his eyesight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Stay, pale queen! for ever by my side.”</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Hush, no words! that smile, I see, forgives me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I am now thy nurse, I bid thee sleep.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Close thine eyes⁠—this flooding moonlight blinds them⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Nay, all’s well again: thou must not weep.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am happy: yet I feel, there’s something</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Swells my heart, and takes my breath away:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through a mist I see thee: near!⁠—come nearer!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Bend⁠—bend down⁠—I yet have much to say.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Iseult</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Heaven! his head sinks back upon the pillow!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Tristram! Tristram! let thy heart not fail.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Call on God and on the holy angels!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">What, love, courage!⁠—Christ! he is so pale.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tristram</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hush, ’tis vain, I feel my end approaching.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">This is what my mother said should be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the fierce pains took her in the forest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The deep draughts of death, in bearing me.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>“Son,” she said, “thy name shall be of sorrow!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Tristram art thou call’d for my death’s sake!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So she said, and died in the drear forest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Grief since then his home with me doth make.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I am dying.⁠—Start not, nor look wildly!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Me, thy living friend, thou canst not save.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, since living we were ununited,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Go not far, O Iseult! from my grave.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Rise, go hence, and seek the princess Iseult:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Speak her fair, she is of royal blood.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, I charg’d her, that ye live together:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">She will grant it⁠—she is kind and good.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Now to sail the seas of Death I leave thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">One last kiss upon the living shore!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Iseult</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tristram!⁠—Tristram!⁠—stay⁠—receive me with thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Iseult leaves thee, Tristram! never more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>You see them clear: the moon shines bright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow⁠—slow and softly, where she stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sinks upon the ground: her hood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had fallen back: her arms outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still hold her lover’s hands: her head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is bow’d, half-buried, on the bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the blanch’d sheet her raven hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies in disorder’d streams; and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strung like white stars, the pearls still are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the golden bracelets heavy and rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flash on her white arms still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very same which yesternight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flash’d in the silver sconces’ light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the feast was gay and the laughter loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Tyntagel’s palace proud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then they deck’d a restless ghost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hot-flush’d cheeks and brilliant eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quivering lips on which the tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of courtly speech abruptly died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a glance which over the crowded floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dancers, and the festive host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flew ever to the door.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the knights eyed her in surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dames whisper’d scoffingly⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Her moods, good lack, they pass like showers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yesternight and she would be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As pale and still as wither’d flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now to-night she laughs and speaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And has a colour in her cheeks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Christ keep us from such fantasy!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The air of the December night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steals coldly around the chamber bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where those lifeless lovers be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swinging with it, in the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flaps the ghostlike tapestry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the arras wrought you see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stately Huntsman, clad in green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round him a fresh forest scene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On that clear forest knoll he stays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his pack round him, and delays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stares and stares, with troubled face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this huge gleam-lit fireplace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At that bright iron-figur’d door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those blown rushes on the floor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gazes down into the room</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heated cheeks and flurried air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to himself he seems to say⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<em>What place is this, and who are they?</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Who is that kneeling Lady fair?</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>And on his pillows that pale Knight</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Who seems of marble on a tomb?</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>How comes it here, this chamber bright</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Through whose mullion’d windows clear</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>The castle court all wet with rain,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>The drawbridge and the moat appear,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>And then the beach, and, mark’d with spray,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>The sunken reefs, and far away</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>The unquiet bright Atlantic plain?⁠—</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<em>What, has some glamour made me sleep,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>And sent me with my dogs to sweep,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>By night, with boisterous bugle peal,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Through some old, sea-side, knightly hall,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Not in the free greenwood at all?</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>That Knight’s asleep, and at her prayer</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>That Lady by the bed doth kneel:</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Then hush, thou boisterous bugle peal!</em>”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wild boar rustles in his lair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fierce hounds snuff the tainted air⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lord and hounds keep rooted there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Cheer, cheer thy dogs into the brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Hunter! and without a fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy golden-tassell’d bugle blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the glades thy pastime take!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thou wilt rouse no sleepers here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For these thou seest are unmov’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cold, cold as those who liv’d and lov’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand years ago.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="tristram-and-iseult-3">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Iseult of Brittany</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>A year had flown, and o’er the sea away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Cornwall, Tristram and queen Iseult lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In King Marc’s chapel, in Tyntagel old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There in a ship they bore those lovers cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The young surviving Iseult, one bright day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had wander’d forth: her children were at play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a green circular hollow in the heath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which borders the sea-shore; a country path</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creeps over it from the till’d fields behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hollow’s grassy banks are soft-inclin’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to one standing on them, far and near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lone unbroken view spreads bright and clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the waste:⁠—This cirque of open ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is light and green; the heather, which all round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creeps thickly, grows not here; but the pale grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is strewn with rocks, and many a shiver’d mass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vein’d white-gleaming quartz, and here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dotted with holly trees and juniper.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the smooth centre of the opening stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three hollies side by side, and made a screen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm with the winter sun, of burnish’d green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With scarlet berries gemm’d, the fell-fare’s food.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the glittering hollies Iseult stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watching her children play; their little hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are busy gathering spars of quartz, and streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of stagshorn for their hats; anon, with screams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mad delight they drop their spoils, and bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the holly clumps and broken ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Racing full speed, and startling in their rush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fell-fares and the speckled missel-thrush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of their glossy coverts: but when now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their cheeks were flush’d, and over each hot brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the feather’d hats of the sweet pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In blinding masses shower’d the golden hair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Iseult called them to her, and the three</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cluster’d under the holly-screen, and she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Told them an old-world Breton history.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Warm in their mantles wrapt, the three stood there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the hollies, in the clear still air⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mantles with those rich furs deep glistering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Venice ships do from swart Egypt bring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long they stayed still⁠—then, pacing at their ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mov’d up and down under the glossy trees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still as they pursued their warm dry road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Iseult’s lips the unbroken story flow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still the children listen’d, their blue eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fix’d on their mother’s face in wide surprise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did their looks stray once to the sea-side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to the brown heaths round them, bright and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to the snow, which, though ’twas all away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the open heath, still by the hedgerows lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to the shining sea-fowl that with screams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bore up from where the bright Atlantic gleams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swooping to landward; nor to where, quite clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fell-fares settled on the thickets near.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they would still have listen’d, till dark night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came keen and chill down on the heather bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, when the red glow on the sea grew cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the grey turrets of the castle old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d sternly through the frosty evening-air⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Iseult took by the hand those children fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought her tale to an end, and found the path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led them home over the darkening heath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And is she happy? Does she see unmov’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The days in which she might have liv’d and lov’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slip without bringing bliss slowly away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One after one, to-morrow like to-day?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joy has not found her yet, nor ever will:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it this thought which makes her mien so still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her features so fatigued, her eyes, though sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sunk, so rarely lifted save to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her children’s? She moves slow: her voice alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath yet an infantine and silver tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But even that comes languidly: in truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seems one dying in a mask of youth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now she will go home, and softly lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her laughing children in their beds, and play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awhile with them before they sleep; and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She’ll light her silver lamp, which fishermen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dragging their nets through the rough waves, afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along this iron coast, know like a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take her broidery frame, and there she’ll sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hour after hour, her gold curls sweeping it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifting her soft-bent head only to mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her children, or to listen to the wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the clock peals midnight, she will move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her work away, and let her fingers rove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the shaggy brows of Tristram’s hound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lies, guarding her feet, along the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else she will fall musing, her blue eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fix’d, her slight hands clasp’d on her lap; then rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at her prie-dieu kneel, until she have told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her rosary beads of ebony tipp’d with gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to her soft sleep: and to-morrow’ll be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day’s exact repeated effigy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yes, it is lonely for her in her hall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The children, and the grey-hair’d seneschal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her women, and Sir Tristram’s agèd hound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are there the sole companions to be found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these she loves; and noisier life than this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would find ill to bear, weak as she is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She has her children, too, and night and day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is with them; and the wide heaths where they play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hollies, and the cliff, and the sea-shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sand, the sea-birds, and the distant sails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are to her dear as to them: the tales</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which this day the children she beguil’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She glean’d from Breton grandames when a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every hut along this sea-coast wild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She herself loves them still, and, when they are told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can forget all to hear them, as of old.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Dear saints, it is not sorrow, as I hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not suffering, which shuts up eye and ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all which has delighted them before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lets us be what we were once no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No: we may suffer deeply, yet retain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Power to be mov’d and sooth’d, for all our pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By what of old pleas’d us, and will again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No: ’tis the gradual furnace of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose hot air our spirits are upcurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until they crumble, or else grow like steel⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which kills in us the bloom, the youth, the spring⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which leaves the fierce necessity to feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But takes away the power⁠—this can avail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By drying up our joy in everything,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make our former pleasures all seem stale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, or some tyrannous single thought, some fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of passion, which subdues our souls to it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till for its sake alone we live and move⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call it ambition, or remorse, or love⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This too can change us wholly, and make seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which we did before, shadow and dream.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And yet, I swear, it angers me to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How this fool passion gulls men potently;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being, in truth, but a diseas’d unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And an unnatural overheat at best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they are full of languor and distress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not having it; which, when they do possess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They straightway are burnt up with fume and care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spend their lives in posting here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where this plague drives them; and have little ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are fretful with themselves, and hard to please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like that bold Caesar, the fam’d Roman wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who wept at reading of a Grecian knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who made a name at younger years than he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that renown’d mirror of chivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prince Alexander, Philip’s peerless son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who carried the great war from Macedon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the Sudan’s realm, and thundered on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To die at thirty-five in Babylon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">What tale did Iseult to the children say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the hollies, that bright winter’s day?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She told them of the fairy-haunted land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away the other side of Brittany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the heaths, edg’d by the lonely sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the deep forest-glades of Broce-liande,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through whose green boughs the golden sunshine creeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Merlin by the enchanted thorn-tree sleeps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For here he came with the fay Vivian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One April, when the warm days first began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was on foot, and that false fay, his friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her white palfrey; here he met his end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In these lone sylvan glades, that April day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This tale of Merlin and the lovely fay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the one Iseult chose, and she brought clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the children’s fancy him and her.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Blowing between the stems, the forest air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had loosen’d the brown curls of Vivian’s hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which play’d on her flush’d cheek, and her blue eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sparkled with mocking glee and exercise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her palfrey’s flanks were mired and bath’d in sweat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they had travell’d far and not stopp’d yet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brier in that tangled wilderness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had scor’d her white right hand, which she allows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rest unglov’d on her green riding-dress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other warded off the drooping boughs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still she chatted on, with her blue eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fix’d full on Merlin’s face, her stately prize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her ’haviour had the morning’s fresh clear grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spirit of the woods was in her face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She look’d so witching fair, that learnèd wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgot his craft, and his best wits took flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he grew fond, and eager to obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mistress, use her empire as she may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They came to where the brushwood ceas’d, and day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peer’d ’twixt the stems; and the ground broke away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a slop’d sward down to a brawling brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up as high as where they stood to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the brook’s further side was clear; but then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The underwood and trees began again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This open glen was studded thick with thorns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then white with blossom; and you saw the horns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the green fern, of the shy fallow-deer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which come at noon down to the water here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You saw the bright-eyed squirrels dart along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the thorns on the green sward; and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blackbird whistled from the dingles near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the light chipping of the woodpecker</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rang lonelily and sharp: the sky was fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a fresh breath of spring stirr’d everywhere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Merlin and Vivian stopp’d on the slope’s brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gaze on the light sea of leaf and bough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which glistering plays all round them, lone and mild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if to itself the quiet forest smil’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the brow-top grew a thorn; and here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grass was dry and moss’d, and you saw clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the hollow: white anemonies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Starr’d the cool turf, and clumps of primroses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran out from the dark underwood behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No fairer resting-place a man could find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Here let us halt,” said Merlin then; and she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nodded, and tied her palfrey to a tree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They sate them down together, and a sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell upon Merlin, more like death, so deep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her finger on her lips, then Vivian rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her brown-lock’d head the wimple throws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And takes it in her hand, and waves it over</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blossom’d thorn-tree and her sleeping lover.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine times she wav’d the fluttering wimple round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made a little plot of magic ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that daised circle, as men say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Merlin prisoner till the judgement-day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she herself whither she will can rove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was passing weary of his love.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="youth-and-calm" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Youth and Calm</h2>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis death! and peace, indeed, is here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ease from shame, and rest from fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s nothing can dismarble now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smoothness of that limpid brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But is a calm like this, in truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowning end of life and youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when this boon rewards the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are all debts paid, has all been said?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And is the heart of youth so light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its step so firm, its eye so bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because on its hot brow there blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wind of promise and repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the far grave, to which it goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because it hath the hope to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One day, to harbour in the tomb?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah no, the bliss youth dreams is one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For daylight, for the cheerful sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For feeling nerves and living breath⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth dreams a bliss on this side death!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It dreams a rest, if not more deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More grateful than this marble sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It hears a voice within it tell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Calm’s not life’s crown, though calm is well.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis all perhaps which man acquires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis not what our youth desires.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="memorial-verses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Memorial Verses<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">April, 1850</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Goethe in Weimar sleeps, and Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since, saw Byron’s struggle cease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one such death remain’d to come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last poetic voice is dumb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What shall be said o’er Wordsworth’s tomb?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">When Byron’s eyes were shut in death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We bow’d our head and held our breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He taught us little: but our soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had <em>felt</em> him like the thunder’s roll.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shivering heart the strife we saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Passion with Eternal Law;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet with reverential awe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We watch’d the fount of fiery life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which serv’d for that Titanic strife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">When Goethe’s death was told, we said⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Sunk, then, is Europe’s sagest head.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Physician of the Iron Age,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Goethe has done his pilgrimage.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took the suffering human race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He read each wound, each weakness clear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And struck his finger on the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said⁠—<em>Thou ailest here, and here.</em>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He look’d on Europe’s dying hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fitful dream and feverish power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye plung’d down the weltering strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The turmoil of expiring life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said⁠—<em>The end is everywhere:</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Art still has truth, take refuge there.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was happy, if to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Causes of things, and far below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His feet to see the lurid flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of terror, and insane distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And headlong fate, be happiness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And Wordsworth!⁠—Ah, pale Ghosts, rejoice!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never has such soothing voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been to your shadowy world convey’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since erst, at morn, some wandering shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the clear song of Orpheus come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Hades, and the mournful gloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wordsworth has gone from us⁠—and ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, may ye feel his voice as we!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He too upon a wintry clime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had fallen⁠—on this iron time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of doubts, disputes, distractions, fears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found us when the age had bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our souls in its benumbing round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke, and loos’d our heart in tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laid us as we lay at birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the cool flowery lap of earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiles broke from us and we had ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hills were round us, and the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went o’er the sun-lit fields again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our foreheads felt the wind and rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our youth return’d: for there was shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On spirits that had long been dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirits dried up and closely furl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The freshness of the early world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Ah, since dark days still bring to light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s prudence and man’s fiery might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time may restore us in his course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goethe’s sage mind and Byron’s force:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But where will Europe’s latter hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again find Wordsworth’s healing power?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others will teach us how to dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And against fear our breast to steel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others will strengthen us to bear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who, ah who, will make us feel?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cloud of mortal destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others will front it fearlessly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who, like him, will put it by?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Keep fresh the grass upon his grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Rotha! with thy living wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing him thy best! for few or none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears thy voice right, now he is gone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="faded-leaves" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Faded Leaves</h2>
			<section id="faded-leaves-1">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The River</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Still glides the stream, slow drops the boat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the rustling poplars’ shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent the swans beside us float:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None speaks, none heeds⁠—ah, turn thy head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Let those arch eyes now softly shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mocking mouth grow sweetly bland:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, let them rest, those eyes, on mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On mine let rest that lovely hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">My pent-up tears oppress my brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart is swoln with love unsaid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, let me weep, and tell my pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on thy shoulder rest my head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Before I die, before the soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which now is mine, must re-attain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immunity from my control,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wander round the world again:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Before this teas’d o’erlabour’d heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever leaves its vain employ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead to its deep habitual smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dead to hopes of future joy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="faded-leaves-2">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Too Late</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Each on his own strict line we move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some find death ere they find love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So far apart their lives are thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the twin soul which halves their own.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And sometimes, by still harder fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lovers meet, but meet too late.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Thy heart is mine!⁠—<em>True, true! ah, true!</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Then, love, thy hand!⁠—<em>Ah no! adieu!</em></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="faded-leaves-3">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Separation</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Stop⁠—Not to me, at this bitter departing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speak of the sure consolations of Time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh be the wound, still-renew’d be its smarting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So but thy image endure in its prime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, if the steadfast commandment of Nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wills that remembrance should always decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the lov’d form and the deep-cherish’d feature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must, when unseen, from the soul fade away⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Me let no half-effac’d memories cumber!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fled, fled at once, be all vestige of thee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep be the darkness, and still be the slumber⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead be the Past and its phantoms to me!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, when we meet, and thy look strays toward me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scanning my face and the changes wrought there⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Who</em>, let me say, <em>is this Stranger regards me,</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<em>With the grey eyes, and the lovely brown hair?</em>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="faded-leaves-4">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">On the Rhine</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Vain is the effort to forget.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some day I shall be cold, I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is the eternal moon-lit snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the high Alps, to which I go:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah, not yet! not yet!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Vain is the agony of grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true, indeed, an iron knot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ties straitly up from mine thy lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were it snapt⁠—thou lov’st me not!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But is despair relief?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Awhile let me with thought have done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as this brimm’d unwrinkled Rhine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that far purple mountain line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lie sweetly in the look divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the slow-sinking sun;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So let me lie, and calm as they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let beam upon my inward view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those eyes of deep, soft, lucent hue⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eyes too expressive to be blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too lovely to be grey.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Ah, Quiet, all things feel thy balm!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those blue hills too, this river’s flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were restless once, but long ago.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tam’d is their turbulent youthful glow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their joy is in their calm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="faded-leaves-5">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Longing</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Come to me in my dreams, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By day I shall be well again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then the night will more than pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hopeless longing of the day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Come, as thou cam’st a thousand times,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A messenger from radiant climes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smile on thy new world, and be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As kind to others as to me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Or, as thou never cam’st in sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come now, and let me dream it truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And part my hair, and kiss my brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And say⁠—<em>My love! why sufferest thou?</em></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Come to me in my dreams, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By day I shall be well again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then the night will more than pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hopeless longing of the day.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="calais-sands" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Calais Sands</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A thousand knights have rein’d their steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To watch this line of sand-hills run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the never-silent Strait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Calais glittering in the sun:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To look toward Ardres’ Golden Field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across this wide aerial plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which glows as if the Middle Age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gorgeous upon earth again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, that to share this famous scene</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw, upon the open sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy lovely presence at my side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy shawl, thy look, thy smile, thy hand!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How exquisite thy voice would come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My darling, on this lonely air!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How sweetly would the fresh sea-breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shake loose some band of soft brown hair!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet now my glance but once hath roved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er Calais and its famous plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To England’s cliffs my gaze is turn’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blue Strait mine eyes I strain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou comest! Yes, the vessel’s cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs dark upon the rolling sea!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh that yon seabird’s wings were mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win one instant’s glimpse of thee!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I must not spring to grasp thy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To woo thy smile, to seek thine eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I may stand far off, and gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watch thee pass unconscious by,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And spell thy looks, and guess thy thoughts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mixt with the idlers on the pier.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, might I always rest unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So I might have thee always near!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To-morrow hurry through the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Flanders to the storied Rhine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-night those soft-fringed eyes shall close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath one roof, my queen! with mine.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="urania" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Urania</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I too have suffer’d: yet I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is not cold, though she seems so:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is not cold, she is not light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But our ignoble souls lack might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">She smiles and smiles, and will not sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we for hopeless passion die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet she could love, those eyes declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were but men nobler than they are.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Eagerly once her gracious ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was turn’d upon the sons of men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But light the serious visage grew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She look’d, and smiled, and saw them through.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Our petty souls, our strutting wits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our labour’d, puny passion-fits⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, may she scorn them still, till we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scorn them as bitterly as she!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yet oh, that Fate would let her see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of some worthier race than we;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One for whose sake she once might prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How deeply she who scorns can love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">His eyes be like the starry lights⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice like sounds of summer nights⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all his lovely mien let pierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The magic of the universe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And she to him will reach her hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gazing in his eyes will stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And know her friend, and weep for glee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cry⁠—<em>Long, long I’ve look’d for thee.</em>⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then will she weep⁠—with smiles, till then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coldly she mocks the sons of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till then her lovely eyes maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their gay, unwavering, deep disdain.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="euphrosyne" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Euphrosyne</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I must not say that thou wert true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet let me say that thou wert fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they that lovely face who view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will not ask if truth be there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Truth⁠—what is truth? Two bleeding hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded by men, by Fortune tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outwearied with their lonely parts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vow to beat henceforth side by side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The world to them was stern and drear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lot was but to weep and moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, let them keep their faith sincere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For neither could subsist alone!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But souls whom some benignant breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath charm’d at birth from gloom and care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These ask no love⁠—these plight no faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they are happy as they are.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The world to them may homage make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And garlands for their forehead weave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what the world can give, they take:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they bring more than they receive.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">They shine upon the world: Their ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one demand alone are coy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will not give us love and tears⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bring us light, and warmth, and joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">It was not love that heav’d thy breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair child! it was the bliss within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adieu! and say that one, at least,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was just to what he did not win.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="dover-beach" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dover Beach</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The sea is calm to-night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tide is full, the moon lies fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Straits;⁠—on the French coast, the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleams, and is gone; the cliffs of England stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glimmering and vast, out in the tranquil bay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to the window, sweet is the night-air!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only, from the long line of spray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the ebb meets the moon-blanch’d sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen! you hear the grating roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pebbles which the waves suck back, and fling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At their return, up the high strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin, and cease, and then again begin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tremulous cadence slow, and bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal note of sadness in.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Sophocles long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard it on the Aegaean, and it brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his mind the turbid ebb and flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human misery; we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find also in the sound a thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing it by this distant northern sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sea of faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was once, too, at the full, and round earth’s shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furl’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now I only hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retreating to the breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the night-wind down the vast edges drear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And naked shingles of the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, love, let us be true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one another! for the world, which seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lie before us like a land of dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So various, so beautiful, so new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath really neither joy, nor love, nor light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we are here as on a darkling plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where ignorant armies clash by night.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="stanzas-in-memory-of-the-late-edward-quillinan-esq" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Stanzas</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">In Memory of the Late Edward Quillinan, Esq.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a></p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I saw him sensitive in frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I knew his spirits low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wish’d him health, success, and fame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I do not wish it now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For these are all their own reward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leave no good behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They try us, oftenest make us hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less modest, pure, and kind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas! Yet to the suffering man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this his mortal state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friends could not give what Fortune can⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Health, ease, a heart elate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But he is now by Fortune foil’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more; and we retain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The memory of a man unspoil’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet, generous, and humane;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With all the fortunate have not⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With gentle voice and brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alive, we would have chang’d his lot:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We would not change it now.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-youth-of-nature" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Youth of Nature</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Rais’d are the dripping oars⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent the boat: the lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely and soft as a dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swims in the sheen of the moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountains stand at its head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear in the pure June night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the valleys are flooded with haze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rydal and Fairfield are there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the shadow Wordsworth lies dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So it is, so it will be for aye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nature is fresh as of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is lovely: a mortal is dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The spots which recall him survive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he lent a new life to these hills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pillar still broods o’er the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which border Ennerdale Lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Egremont sleeps by the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gleam of The Evening Star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twinkles on Grasmere no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ruin’d and solemn and grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sheepfold of Michael survives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far to the south, the heath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still blows in the Quantock coombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the favourite waters of Ruth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>These survive: yet not without pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pain and dejection to-night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can I feel that their Poet is gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He grew old in an age he condemn’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He look’d on the rushing decay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the times which had shelter’d his youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt the dissolving throes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a social order he lov’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outliv’d his brethren, his peers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like the Theban seer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Died in his enemies’ day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Cold bubbled the spring of Tilphusa,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Copais lay bright in the moon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helicon glass’d in the lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its firs, and afar, rose the peaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Parnassus, snowily clear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thebes was behind him in flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the clang of arms in his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When his awe-struck captors led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Theban seer to the spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tiresias drank and died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor did reviving Thebes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See such a prophet again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Well may we mourn, when the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a sacred poet lies low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an age which can rear them no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The complaining millions of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darken in labour and pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he was a priest to us all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the wonder and bloom of the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which we saw with his eyes, and were glad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is dead, and the fruit-bearing day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his race is past on the earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darkness returns to our eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For oh, is it you, is it you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moonlight, and shadow, and lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mountains, that fill us with joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the Poet who sings you so well?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it you, O Beauty, O Grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Charm, O Romance, that we feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the voice which reveals what you are?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ye, like daylight and sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shar’d and rejoic’d in by all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or are ye immers’d in the mass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of matter, and hard to extract,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sunk at the core of the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too deep for the most to discern?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like stars in the deep of the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which arise on the glass of the sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But are lost when their watcher is gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“They are here”⁠—I heard, as men heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Mysian Ida the voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Mighty Mother,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> or Crete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmur of Nature reply⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Loveliness, Magic, and Grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are here⁠—they are set in the world⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They abide⁠—and the finest of souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has not been thrill’d by them all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the dullest been dead to them quite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poet who sings them may die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they are immortal, and live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they are the life of the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will ye not learn it, and know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When ye mourn that a poet is dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the singer was less than his themes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Life, and Emotion, and I?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“More than the singer are these.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weak is the tremor of pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thrills in his mournfullest chord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that which once ran through his soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold the elation of joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his gladdest, airiest song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that which of old in his youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill’d him and made him divine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardly his voice at its best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives us a sense of the awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vastness, the grandeur, the gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the unlit gulph of himself.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Ye know not yourselves⁠—and your bards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clearest, the best, who have read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most in themselves, have beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less than they left unreveal’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye express not yourselves⁠—can ye make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With marble, with colour, with word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What charm’d you in others re-live?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can thy pencil, O Artist, restore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The figure, the bloom of thy love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she was in her morning of spring?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst thou paint the ineffable smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her eyes as they rested on thine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can the image of life have the glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The motion of life itself?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Yourselves and your fellows ye know not⁠—and me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Mateless, the One, will ye know?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will ye scan me, and read me, and tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the thoughts that ferment in my breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My longing, my sadness, my joy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will ye claim for your great ones the gift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have render’d the gleam of my skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have echoed the moan of my seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Utter’d the voice of my hills?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When your great ones depart, will ye say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>All things have suffer’d a loss⁠—</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Nature is hid in their grave?</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Race after race, man after man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have dream’d that my secret was theirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have thought that I liv’d but for them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they were my glory and joy.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are dust, they are chang’d, they are gone.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I remain.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-youth-of-man" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Youth of Man</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">We, O Nature, depart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou survivest us: this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, I know, is the law.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, but more than this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou who seest us die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seest us change while we live;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seest our dreams, one by one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seest our errors depart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Watchest us, Nature, throughout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mild and inscrutably calm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Well for us that we change!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well for us that the Power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in our morning prime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the mistakes of our youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet, and forgiving, and good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees the contrition of age!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Behold, O Nature, this pair!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See them to-night where they stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not with the halo of youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowning their brows with its light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not with the sunshine of hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not with the rapture of spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which they had of old, when they stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Years ago at my side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this self-same garden, and said;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We are young, and the world is ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For man is the king of the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fools that these mystics are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who prate of Nature! but she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has neither beauty, nor warmth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor life, nor emotion, nor power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Man has a thousand gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the generous dreamer invests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The senseless world with them all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nature is nothing! her charm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lives in our eyes which can paint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lives in our hearts which can feel.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thou, O Nature, wert mute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mute as of old: days flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Days and years; and Time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the ceaseless stroke of his wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brush’d off the bloom from their soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clouded and dim grew their eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Languid their heart; for Youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quicken’d its pulses no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly within the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an ever-narrowing world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They droop’d, they grew blind, they grew old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee and their Youth in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature, they saw no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Murmur of living!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stir of existence!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soul of the world!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make, oh make yourselves felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dying spirit of Youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, like the breath of the spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave not a human soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grow old in darkness and pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only the living can feel you:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But leave us not while we live.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Here they stand to-night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, where this grey balustrade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowns the still valley: behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the castled house, with its woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which shelter’d their childhood, the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On its ivied windows: a scent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the grey-wall’d gardens, a breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the fragrant stock and the pink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perfumes the evening air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their children play on the lawns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stand and listen: they hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children’s shouts and, at times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faintly, the bark of a dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a distant farm in the hills:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing besides: in front</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wide, wide valley outspreads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dim horizon, repos’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the twilight, and bath’d in dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Corn-field and hamlet and copse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkening fast; but a light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off, a glory of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still plays on the city spires:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there in the dusk by the walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the grey mist marking its course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the silent, flowery land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On, to the plains, to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floats the Imperial Stream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Well I know what they feel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gaze, and the evening wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plays on their faces: they gaze;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Airs from the Eden of Youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awake and stir in their soul:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Past returns; they feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What they are, alas! what they were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, not Nature, are chang’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well I know what they feel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Hush! for tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin to steal to their eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hush! for fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows from such sorrow as theirs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And they remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With piercing untold anguish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The proud boasting of their youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they feel how Nature was fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mists of delusion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the scales of habit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall away from their eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they see, for a moment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretching out, like the Desert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its weary, unprofitable length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their faded, ignoble lives.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">While the locks are yet brown on thy head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the soul still looks through thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the heart still pours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mantling blood to thy cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sink, O Youth, in thy soul!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yearn to the greatness of Nature!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rally the good in the depths of thyself!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lines-written-in-kensington-gardens" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lines Written in Kensington Gardens</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In this lone open glade I lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Screen’d by deep boughs on either hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at its head, to stay the eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those black-crown’d, red-boled pine-trees stand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Birds here make song, each bird has his,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the girdling city’s hum.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How green under the boughs it is!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How thick the tremulous sheep-cries come!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes a child will cross the glade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take his nurse his broken toy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes a thrush flit overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in her unknown day’s employ.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here at my feet what wonders pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What endless, active life is here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What blowing daisies, fragrant grass!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An air-stirr’d forest, fresh and clear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Scarce fresher is the mountain sod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the tired angler lies, stretch’d out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, eased of basket and of rod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counts his day’s spoil, the spotted trout.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the huge world which roars hard by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be others happy, if they can!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in my helpless cradle I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was breathed on by the rural Pan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I, on men’s impious uproar hurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think often, as I hear them rave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That peace has left the upper world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now keeps only in the grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet here is peace for ever new!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I, who watch them, am away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still all things in this glade go through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The changes of their quiet day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then to their happy rest they pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flowers close, the birds are fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night comes down upon the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The child sleeps warmly in his bed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Calm soul of all things! make it mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel, amid the city’s jar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there abides a peace of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man did not make, and cannot mar!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The will to neither strive nor cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The power to feel with others give!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm, calm me more! nor let me die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before I have begun to live.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="morality" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Morality</h2>
			<p>
				<span>We cannot kindle when we will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire which in the heart resides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirit bloweth and is still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mystery our soul abides:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But tasks in hours of insight will’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can be through hours of gloom fulfill’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With aching hands and bleeding feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We dig and heap, lay stone on stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We bear the burden and the heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the long day, and wish ’twere done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not till the hours of light return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All we have built do we discern.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, when the clouds are off the soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou dost bask in Nature’s eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask, how <em>she</em> view’d thy self-control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy struggling task’d morality.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nature, whose free, light, cheerful air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft made thee, in thy gloom, despair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And she, whose censure thou dost dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose eye thou wast afraid to seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, on her face a glow is spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strong emotion on her cheek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Ah, child,” she cries, “that strife divine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence was it, for it is not mine?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There is no effort on <em>my</em> brow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do not strive, I do not weep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I rush with the swift spheres, and glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In joy, and when I will, I sleep.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet that severe, that earnest air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw, I felt it once⁠—but where?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I knew not yet the gauge of Time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wore the manacles of Space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I felt it in some other clime⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw it in some other place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—’Twas when the heavenly house I trod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay upon the breast of God.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="progress" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Progress</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The Master stood upon the mount, and taught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw a fire in his disciples’ eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The old law,” they cried, “is wholly come to naught!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold the new world rise!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Was it,” the Lord then said, “with scorn ye saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old law observed by Scribes and Pharisees?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I say unto you, see <em>ye</em> keep that law</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More faithfully than these!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Too hasty heads for ordering worlds, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think not that I to annul the law have will’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No jot, no tittle from the law shall pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till all hath been fulfill’d.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Christ said eighteen hundred years ago.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what then shall be said to those to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who cry aloud to lay the old world low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To clear the new world’s way?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Religious fervours! ardour misapplied!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence, hence,” they cry, “ye do but keep man blind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But keep him self-immersed, preoccupied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lame the active mind.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! from the old world let some one answer give:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Scorn ye this world, their tears, their inward cares?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I say unto you, see that <em>your</em> souls live</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A deeper life than theirs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Say ye: The spirit of man has found new roads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we must leave the old faiths, and walk therein?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave then the Cross as ye have left carved gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But guard the fire within!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bright, else, and fast the stream of life may roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no man may the other’s hurt behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet each will have one anguish⁠—his own soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which perishes of cold.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here let that voice make end! then let a strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a far lonelier distance, like the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be heard, floating through heaven, and fill again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These men’s profoundest mind:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Children of men! the unseen Power, whose eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever doth accompany mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath look’d on no religion scornfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That men did ever find.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Which has not taught weak wills how much they can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which has not fall’n on the dry heart like rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which has not cried to sunk, self-weary man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<em>Thou must be born again!</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Children of men! not that your age excel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pride of life the ages of your sires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that <em>you</em> think clear, feel deep, bear fruit well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Friend of man desires.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-future" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Future</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A wanderer is man from his birth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was born in a ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the breast of the River of Time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brimming with wonder and joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spreads out his arms to the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rivets his gaze on the banks of the stream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">As what he sees is, so have his thoughts been.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether he wakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the snowy mountainous pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echoing the screams of the eagles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hems in its gorges the bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the new-born clear-flowing stream:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether he first sees light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the river in gleaming rings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sluggishly winds through the plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether in sound of the swallowing sea:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As is the world on the banks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So is the mind of the man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Vainly does each as he glides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fable and dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the lands which the River of Time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had left ere he woke on its breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or shall reach when his eyes have been clos’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the tract where he sails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wots of: only the thoughts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rais’d by the objects he passes, are his.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Who can see the green Earth any more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she was by the sources of Time?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who imagines her fields as they lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sunshine, unworn by the plough?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thinks as they thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tribes who then roam’d on her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her vigorous primitive sons?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now reads in her bosom as clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Rebekah read, when she sate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At eve by the palm-shaded well?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who guards in her breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As deep, as pellucid a spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of feeling, as tranquil, as sure?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What Bard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the height of his vision, can deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of God, of the world, of the soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a plainness as near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As flashing as Moses felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he lay in the night by his flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the starlit Arabian waste?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can rise and obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beck of the Spirit like him?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">This tract which the River of Time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now flows through with us, is the Plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone is the calm of its earlier shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Border’d by cities and hoarse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a thousand cries is its stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we on its breast, our minds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are confus’d as the cries which we hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changing and shot as the sights which we see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And we say that repose has fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever the course of the River of Time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cities will crowd to its edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a blacker, incessanter line;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the din will be more on its banks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Denser the trade on its stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flatter the plain where it flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fiercer the sun overhead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never will those on its breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See an ennobling sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink of the feeling of quiet again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But what was before us we know not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we know not what shall succeed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Haply, the River of Time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it grows, as the towns on its marge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fling their wavering lights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a wider statelier stream⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May acquire, if not the calm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of its early mountainous shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet a solemn peace of its own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And the width of the waters, the hush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the grey expanse where he floats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freshening its current and spotted with foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it draws to the Ocean, may strike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace to the soul of the man on its breast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the pale Waste widens around him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the banks fade dimmer away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the stars come out, and the night-wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings up the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmurs and scents of the infinite Sea.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-summer-night" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Summer Night</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In the deserted moon-blanch’d street</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How lonely rings the echo of my feet!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those windows, which I gaze at, frown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent and white, unopening down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repellent as the world:⁠—but see!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A break between the housetops shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon, and, lost behind her, fading dim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the dewy dark obscurity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down at the far horizon’s rim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doth a whole tract of heaven disclose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And to my mind the thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is on a sudden brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a past night, and a far different scene.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlands stood out into the moon-lit deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As clearly as at noon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spring-tide’s brimming flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heav’d dazzlingly between;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Houses with long white sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girdled the glistening bay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind, through the soft air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue haze-cradled mountains spread away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That night was far more fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the same restless pacings to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the same vainly throbbing heart was there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the same bright calm moon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And the calm moonlight seems to say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Hast thou then still the old unquiet breast</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>That neither deadens into rest</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Nor ever feels the fiery glow</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>That whirls the spirit from itself away,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>But fluctuates to and fro</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Never by passion quite possess’d</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>And never quite benumb’d by the world’s sway?</em>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, I know not if to pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still to be what I am, or yield, and be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like all the other men I see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For most men in a brazen prison live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where in the sun’s hot eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heads bent o’er their toil, they languidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lives to some unmeaning taskwork give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreaming of naught beyond their prison wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as, year after year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh products of their barren labour fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their tired hands, and rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never yet comes more near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gloom settles slowly down over their breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while they try to stem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves of mournful thought by which they are prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death in their prison reaches them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfreed, having seen nothing, still unblest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And the rest, a few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escape their prison and depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the wide Ocean of Life anew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the freed prisoner, where’er his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listeth, will sail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor doth he know how there prevail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despotic on that sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trade-winds which cross it from eternity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Awhile he holds some false way, undebarr’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thwarting signs, and braves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The freshening wind and blackening waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the tempest strikes him, and between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lightning bursts is seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a driving wreck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pale Master on his spar-strewn deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anguish’d face and flying hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasping the rudder hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still bent to make some port he knows not where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still standing for some false impossible shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sterner comes the roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sea and wind, and through the deepening gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fainter and fainter wreck and helmsman loom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he too disappears, and comes no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Is there no life, but these alone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Madman or slave, must man be one?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Plainness and clearness without shadow of stain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clearness divine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye Heavens, whose pure dark regions have no sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of languor, though so calm, and though so great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are yet untroubled and unpassionate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who though so noble share in the world’s toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, though so task’d keep free from dust and soil:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not say that your mild deeps retain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tinge, it may be, of their silent pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who have long’d deeply once, and long’d in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I will rather say that you remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A world above man’s head, to let him see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How boundless might his soul’s horizons be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How vast, yet of what clear transparency.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How it were good to abide there, and breathe free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How fair a lot to fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is left to each man still.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-buried-life" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Buried Life</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Light flows our war of mocking words, and yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, with tears mine eyes are wet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel a nameless sadness o’er me roll.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yes, yes, we know that we can jest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know, we know that we can smile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there’s a something in this breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which thy light words bring no rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy gay smiles no anodyne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give me thy hand, and hush awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn those limpid eyes on mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let me read there, love, thy inmost soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Alas, is even Love too weak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To unlock the heart, and let it speak?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are even lovers powerless to reveal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one another what indeed they feel?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew the mass of men conceal’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their thoughts, for fear that if reveal’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would by other men be met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blank indifference, or with blame reprov’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew they liv’d and mov’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trick’d in disguises, alien to the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, and alien to themselves⁠—and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same heart beats in every human breast!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But we, my love⁠—doth a like spell benumb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hearts⁠—our voices?⁠—must we too be dumb?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Ah, well for us, if even we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even for a moment, can get free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our heart, and have our lips unchain’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that which seals them hath been deep-ordain’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Fate, which foresaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How frivolous a baby man would be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By what distractions he would be possess’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How he would pour himself in every strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well-nigh change his own identity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it might keep from his capricious play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His genuine self, and force him to obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in his own despite, his being’s law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade through the deep recesses of our breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unregarded River of our Life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursue with indiscernible flow its way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that we should not see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The buried stream, and seem to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eddying about in blind uncertainty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though driving on with it eternally.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But often, in the world’s most crowded streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But often, in the din of strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There rises an unspeakable desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the knowledge of our buried life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thirst to spend our fire and restless force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tracking out our true, original course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A longing to inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the mystery of this heart that beats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wild, so deep in us, to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence our thoughts come and where they go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a man in his own breast then delves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But deep enough, alas, none ever mines:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we have been on many thousand lines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we have shown on each talent and power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hardly have we, for one little hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been on our own line, have we been ourselves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardly had skill to utter one of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nameless feelings that course through our breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they course on for ever unexpress’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And long we try in vain to speak and act</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hidden self, and what we say and do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is eloquent, is well⁠—but ’tis not true:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then we will no more be rack’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With inward striving, and demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the thousand nothings of the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their stupefying power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah yes, and they benumb us at our call:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet still, from time to time, vague and forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the soul’s subterranean depth upborne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from an infinitely distant land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come airs, and floating echoes, and convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A melancholy into all our day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Only⁠—but this is rare⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a belovèd hand is laid in ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, jaded with the rush and glare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the interminable hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our eyes can in another’s eyes read clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When our world-deafen’d ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is by the tones of a lov’d voice caress’d⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bolt is shot back somewhere in our breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a lost pulse of feeling stirs again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eye sinks inward, and the heart lies plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what we mean, we say, and what we would, we know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man becomes aware of his life’s flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hears its winding murmur, and he sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meadows where it glides, the sun, the breeze.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And there arrives a lull in the hot race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein he doth for ever chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flying and elusive shadow, Rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An air of coolness plays upon his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And an unwonted calm pervades his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then he thinks he knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Hills where his life rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Sea where it goes.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="self-deception" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Self-Deception</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Say, what blinds us, that we claim the glory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of possessing powers not our share?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since man woke on earth, he knows his story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, before we woke on earth, we were.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Long, long since, undower’d yet, our spirit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roam’d, ere birth, the treasuries of God:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the gifts, the powers it might inherit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask’d an outfit for its earthly road.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then, as now, this tremulous, eager Being</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strain’d, and long’d, and grasp’d each gift it saw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as now, a Power beyond our seeing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stav’d us back, and gave our choice the law.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Ah, whose hand that day through heaven guided</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s blank spirit, since it was not we?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, who sway’d our choice, and who decided</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What our gifts, and what our wants should be?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For, alas! he left us each retaining</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shreds of gifts which he refus’d in full.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still these waste us with their hopeless straining⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still the attempt to use them proves them null.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And on earth we wander, groping, reeling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Powers stir in us, stir and disappear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, and he, who placed our master-feeling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fail’d to place our master-feeling clear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">We but dream we have our wish’d-for powers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ends we seek we never shall attain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, <em>some</em> power exists there, which is ours?</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Some</em> end is there, we indeed may gain?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-second-best" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Second Best</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Moderate tasks and moderate leisure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiet living, strict-kept measure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both in suffering and in pleasure⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis for this thy nature yearns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But so many books thou readest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But so many schemes thou breedest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But so many wishes feedest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thy poor head almost turns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And (the world’s so madly jangled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Human things so fast entangled)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature’s wish must now be strangled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that best which she discerns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So it <em>must</em> be! yet, while leading</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strain’d life, while overfeeding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the rest, his wit with reading,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No small profit that man earns,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who through all he meets can steer him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can reject what cannot clear him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cling to what can truly cheer him!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who each day more surely learns</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That an impulse, from the distance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his deepest, best existence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the words, “Hope, Light, Persistence,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strongly stirs and truly burns!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="despondency" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Despondency</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The thoughts that rain their steady glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like stars on life’s cold sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which others know, or say they know⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never shone for me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thoughts light, like gleams, my spirit’s sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they will not remain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They light me once, they hurry by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never come again.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="revolutions" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Revolutions</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Before Man parted for this earthly strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet upon the verge of heaven he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God put a heap of letters in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade him make with them what word he could.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And Man has turn’d them many times: made Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rome, England, France:⁠—yes, nor in vain essay’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Way after way, changes that never cease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The letters have combin’d: something was made.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But ah, an inextinguishable sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haunts him that he has not made what he should.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he has still, though old, to recommence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since he has not yet found the word God would.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And Empire after Empire, at their height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sway, have felt this boding sense come on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have felt their huge frames not constructed right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And droop’d, and slowly died upon their throne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">One day, thou say’st, there will at last appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word, the order, which God meant should be.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, we shall know <em>that</em> well when it comes near:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The band will quit Man’s heart:⁠—he will breathe free.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-neckan" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Neckan</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In summer, on the headlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Baltic Sea along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits Neckan with his harp of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sings his plaintive song.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Green rolls beneath the headlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Green rolls the Baltic Sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, below the Neckan’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His wife and children be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sings not of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its shells and roses pale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of earth, of earth the Neckan sings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hath no other tale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sits upon the headlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sings a mournful stave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all he saw and felt on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far from the green sea wave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sings how, a knight, he wander’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By castle, field, and town.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But earthly knights have harder hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the Sea Children own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sings of his earthly bridal⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Priest, knights, and ladies gay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And who art thou,” the priest began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Sir Knight, who wedd’st to-day?”⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I am no knight,” he answer’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“From the sea waves I come.”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knights drew sword, the ladies scream’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The surplic’d priest stood dumb.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sings how from the chapel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He vanish’d with his bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore her down to the sea halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the salt sea tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sings how she sits weeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid shells that round her lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“False Neckan shares my bed,” she weeps;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“No Christian mate have I.”⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sings how through the billows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He rose to earth again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought a priest to sign the cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Neckan Heaven might gain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sings how, on an evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the birch trees cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sate and play’d his harp of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside the river pool.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beside the pool sate Neckan⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tears fill’d his cold blue eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his white mule, across the bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cassock’d priest rode by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why sitt’st thou there, O Neckan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And play’st thy harp of gold?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooner shall this my staff bear leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than thou shalt Heaven behold.”⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The cassock’d priest rode onwards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vanished with his mule.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Neckan in the twilight grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wept by the river pool.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In summer, on the headlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Baltic Sea along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits Neckan with his harp of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sings this plaintive song.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-caution-to-poets" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Caution to Poets</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What poets feel not, when they make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pleasure in creating,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world, in <em>its</em> turn, will not take</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pleasure in contemplating.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="stanzas-from-the-grande-chartreuse" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Stanzas from the Grande Chartreuse</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Through Alpine meadows soft-suffused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rain, where thick the crocus blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past the dark forges long disused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mule-track from Saint Laurent goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bridge is cross’d, and slow we ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through forest, up the mountain-side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The autumnal evening darkens round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind is up, and drives the rain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, hark! far down, with strangled sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth the Dead Guiers’ stream complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where that wet smoke, among the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over his boiling cauldron broods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Swift rush the spectral vapours white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past limestone scars with ragged pines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showing⁠—then blotting from our sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halt! through the cloud-drift something shines!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High in the valley, wet and drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The huts of Courrerie appear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><em>Strike leftward!</em> cries our guide; and higher</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounts up the stony forest-way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last the encircling trees retire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look! through the showery twilight grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What pointed roofs are these advance?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A palace of the Kings of France?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Approach, for what we seek is here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alight and sparely sup and wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For rest in this outbuilding near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then cross the sward and reach that gate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knock; pass the wicket! Thou art come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Carthusians’ world-famed home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The silent courts, where night and day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into their stone-carved basins cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The splashing icy fountains play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The humid corridors behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where ghostlike in the deepening night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cowl’d forms brush by in gleaming white.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The chapel, where no organ’s peal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invests the stern and naked prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With penitential cries they kneel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrestle; rising then, with bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And white uplifted faces stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passing the Host from hand to hand;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Each takes; and then his visage wan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is buried in his cowl once more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cells⁠—the suffering Son of Man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the wall! the knee-worn floor!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, where they sleep, that wooden bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which shall their coffin be, when dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The library, where tract and tome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to feed priestly pride are there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hymn the conquering march of Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet to amuse, as ours are;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They paint of souls the inner strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their drops of blood, their death in life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The garden, overgrown⁠—yet mild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those fragrant herbs are flowering there!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong children of the Alpine wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose culture is the brethren’s care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human tasks their only one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cheerful works beneath the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Those halls too, destined to contain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each its own pilgrim host of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From England, Germany, or Spain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All are before me! I behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The House, the Brotherhood austere!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—And what am I, that I am here?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For rigorous teachers seized my youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And purged its faith, and trimm’d its fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show’d me the high white star of Truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There bade me gaze, and there aspire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now their whispers pierce the gloom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>What dost thou in this living tomb?</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forgive me, masters of the mind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At whose behest I long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much unlearnt, so much resign’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come not here to be your foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seek these anchorites, not in ruth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To curse and to deny your truth;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not as their friend or child I speak!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as on some far northern strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking of his own Gods, a Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pity and mournful awe might stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before some fallen Runic stone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For both were faiths, and both are gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wandering between two worlds, one dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other powerless to be born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nowhere yet to rest my head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like these, on earth I wait forlorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their faith, my tears, the world deride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come to shed them at their side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, hide me in your gloom profound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye solemn seats of holy pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take me, cowl’d forms, and fence me round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I possess my soul again!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till free my thoughts before me roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not chafed by hourly false control.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For the world cries your faith is now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a dead time’s exploded dream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My melancholy, sciolists say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is a pass’d mode, an outworn theme⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the world had ever had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A faith, or sciolists been sad.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, if it <em>be</em> pass’d, take away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least, the restlessness⁠—the pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be man henceforth no more a prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these out-dated stings again!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobleness of grief is gone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, leave us not the fret alone!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, if you cannot give us ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Last of the race of them who grieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here leave us to die out with these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Last of the people who believe!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent, while years engrave the brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent⁠—the best are silent now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Achilles ponders in his tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kings of modern thought are dumb;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent they are, though not content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wait to see the future come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have the grief men had of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they contend and cry no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our fathers water’d with their tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sea of time whereon we sail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their voices were in all men’s ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who pass’d within their puissant hail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still the same Ocean round us raves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we stand mute and watch the waves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For what avail’d it, all the noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And outcry of the former men?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, have their sons obtain’d more joys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, is life lighter now than then?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sufferers died, they left their pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pangs which tortured them remain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What helps it now, that Byron bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With haughty scorn which mock’d the smart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Europe to the Aetolian shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pageant of his bleeding heart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thousands counted every groan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Europe made his woe her own?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What boots it, Shelley! that the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried thy lovely wail away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Musical through Italian trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which fringe thy soft blue Spezzian bay?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inheritors of thy distress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have restless hearts one throb the less?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or are we easier, to have read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Obermann! the sad, stern page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which tells us how thou hidd’st thy head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fierce tempest of thine age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the lone brakes of Fontainebleau,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or chalets near the Alpine snow?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye slumber in your silent grave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world, which for an idle day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grace to your mood of sadness gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since hath flung her weeds away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal trifler breaks your spell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we⁠—we learnt your lore too well!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There may, perhaps, yet dawn an age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More fortunate, alas! than we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which without hardness will be sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gay without frivolity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sons of the world, oh, speed those years;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, till they rise, allow our tears!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Allow them! We admire with awe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The exulting thunder of your race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You give the universe your law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You triumph over time and space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your pride of life, your tireless powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We laud them, but they are not ours.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We are like children rear’d in shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath some old-world abbey wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgotten in a forest-glade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And secret from the eyes of all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep, deep the greenwood round them waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their abbey, and its close of graves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But where the road runs near the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft through the trees they catch a glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of passing troops in the sun’s beam⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pennon, and plume, and flashing lance!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth to the world those soldiers fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To life, to cities, and to war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And through the wood, another way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faint bugle-notes from far are borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where hunters gather, staghounds bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round some fair forest-lodge at morn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gay dames are there in sylvan green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughter and cries⁠—those notes between!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The banners flashing through the trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make their blood dance and chain their eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bugle-music on the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrests them with a charm’d surprise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banner by turns and bugle woo:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Ye shy recluses, follow too!</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O children, what do ye reply?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Action and pleasure, will ye roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through these secluded dells to cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call us? but too late ye come!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too late for us your call ye blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose bent was taken long ago.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Long since we pace this shadow’d nave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We watch those yellow tapers shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Emblems of hope over the grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the high altar’s depth divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The organ carries to our ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its accents of another sphere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fenced early in this cloistral round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of reverie, of shade, of prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How should we grow in other ground?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How can we flower in foreign air?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass, banners, pass, and bugles, cease!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave our desert to its peace!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-church-of-brou" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Church of Brou</h2>
			<section id="the-church-of-brou-1">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Castle</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Down the Savoy valleys sounding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Echoing round this castle old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid the distant mountain-chalets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hark! what bell for church is toll’d?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the bright October morning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Savoy’s Duke had left his bride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the Castle, past the drawbridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flow’d the hunters’ merry tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Steeds are neighing, gallants glittering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gay, her smiling lord to greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her mullion’d chamber casement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiles the Duchess Marguerite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From Vienna by the Danube</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here she came, a bride, in spring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now the autumn crisps the forest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hunters gather, bugles ring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hounds are pulling, prickers swearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Horses fret, and boar-spears glance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off!⁠—They sweep the marshy forests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Westward, on the side of France.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hark! the game’s on foot; they scatter:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down the forest ridings lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Furious, single horsemen gallop.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hark! a shout⁠—a crash⁠—a groan!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pale and breathless, came the hunters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the turf dead lies the boar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God! the Duke lies stretch’d beside him⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Senseless, weltering in his gore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the dull October evening,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down the leaf-strewn forest road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the Castle, past the drawbridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came the hunters with their load.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the hall, with sconces blazing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ladies waiting round her seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cloth’d in smiles, beneath the dais</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sate the Duchess Marguerite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hark! below the gates unbarring!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tramp of men and quick commands!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“⁠—’Tis my lord come back from hunting.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Duchess claps her hands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Slow and tired, came the hunters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stopp’d in darkness in the court.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“⁠—Ho, this way, ye laggard hunters!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the hall! What sport? What sport?”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Slow they enter’d with their Master;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the hall they laid him down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On his coat were leaves and blood-stains:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his brow an angry frown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dead her princely youthful husband</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay before his youthful wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bloody ’neath the flaring sconces:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sight froze all her life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In Vienna by the Danube</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kings hold revel, gallants meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gay of old amid the gayest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the Duchess Marguerite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In Vienna by the Danube</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feast and dance her youth beguil’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that hour she never sorrow’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But from then she never smil’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Mid the Savoy mountain valleys</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from town or haunt of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stands a lonely Church, unfinish’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the Duchess Maud began;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Old, that Duchess stern began it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In grey age, with palsied hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she died while it was building,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Church unfinish’d stands;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Stands as erst the builders left it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she sunk into her grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mountain greensward paves the chancel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Harebells flower in the nave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In my castle all is sorrow,”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said the Duchess Marguerite then.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Guide me, vassals, to the mountains!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We will build the Church again.”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sandall’d palmers, faring homeward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Austrian knights from Syria came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Austrian wanderers bring, O warders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Homage to your Austrian dame.”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From the gate the warders answer’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Gone, O knights, is she you knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead our Duke, and gone his Duchess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seek her at the Church of Brou.”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Austrian knights and much-worn palmers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Climb the winding mountain way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reach the valley, where the Fabric</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rises higher day by day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Stones are sawing, hammers ringing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the work the bright sun shines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the Savoy mountain meadows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the stream, below the pines.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On her palfrey white the Duchess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sate and watch’d her working train;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flemish carvers, Lombard gilders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">German masons, smiths from Spain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Clad in black, on her white palfrey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her old architect beside⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There they found her in the mountains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Morn and noon and eventide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she sate, and watch’d the builders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the Church was roof’d and done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Last of all, the builders rear’d her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the nave a tomb of stone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On the tomb two Forms they sculptur’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifelike in the marble pale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One, the Duke in helm and armour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One, the Duchess in her veil.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Round the tomb the carv’d stone fretwork</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was at Easter tide put on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the Duchess clos’d her labours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she died at the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> John.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-church-of-brou-2">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Church</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Upon the glistening leaden roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the new Pile, the sunlight shines.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The stream goes leaping by.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hills are cloth’d with pines sun-proof.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid bright green fields, below the pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Stands the Church on high.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Church is this, from men aloof?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis the Church of Brou.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At sunrise, from their dewy lair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crossing the stream, the kine are seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Round the wall to stray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The churchyard wall that clips the square</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of open hill-sward fresh and green</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Where last year they lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all things now are order’d fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round the Church of Brou.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On Sundays, at the matin chime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Alpine peasants, two and three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Climb up here to pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burghers and dames, at summer’s prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ride out to church from Chambery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dight with mantles gay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But else it is a lonely time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round the Church of Brou.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On Sundays, too, a priest doth come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the wall’d town beyond the pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Down the mountain way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then you hear the organ’s hum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You hear the white-rob’d priest say mass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the people pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But else the woods and fields are dumb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round the Church of Brou.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after church, when mass is done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people to the nave repair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Round the Tomb to stray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And marvel at the Forms of stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And praise the chisell’d broideries rare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then they drop away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Princely Pair are left alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the Church of Brou.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-church-of-brou-3">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Tomb</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>So rest, for ever rest, O Princely Pair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In your high Church, ’mid the still mountain air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where horn, and hound, and vassals, never come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the blessed Saints are smiling dumb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the rich painted windows of the nave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On aisle, and transept, and your marble grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou, young Prince, shall never more arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the fring’d mattress where thy Duchess lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On autumn mornings, when the bugle sounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ride across the drawbridge with thy hounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hunt the boar in the crisp woods till eve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, O Princess, shalt no more receive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou and thy ladies, in the hall of state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The jaded hunters with their bloody freight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coming benighted to the castle-gate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sleep, for ever sleep, O Marble Pair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if ye wake, let it be then, when fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the carv’d Western Front a flood of light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Streams from the setting sun, and colours bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prophets, transfigur’d Saints, and Martyrs brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the vast western window of the nave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the pavement round the Tomb there glints</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chequer-work of glowing sapphire tints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And amethyst, and ruby;⁠—then unclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your eyelids on the stone where ye repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from your broider’d pillows lift your heads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rise upon your cold white marble beds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looking down on the warm rosy tints</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That chequer, at your feet, the illumin’d flints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say⁠—<em>“What is this? we are in bliss⁠—forgiven⁠—</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Behold the pavement of the courts of Heaven!”</em>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or let it be on autumn nights, when rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth rustlingly above your heads complain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the smooth leaden roof, and on the walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shedding her pensive light at intervals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Moon through the clere-story windows shines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the wind washes through the mountain pines.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, gazing up through the dim pillars high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foliag’d marble forest where ye lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>“Hush”</em>⁠—ye will say⁠—<em>“it is eternity.</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>This is the glimmering verge of Heaven, and these</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>The columns of the Heavenly Palaces.”</em>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the sweeping of the wind your ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The passage of the Angels’ wings will hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the lichen-crusted leads above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rustle of the eternal rain of Love.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="sohrab-and-rostam" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Sohrab and Rostam<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">An Episode</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>And the first grey of morning fill’d the east,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fog rose out of the Oxus stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all the Tartar camp along the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was hush’d, and still the men were plunged in sleep:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sohrab alone, he slept not: all night long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had lain wakeful, tossing on his bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the grey dawn stole into his tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rose, and clad himself, and girt his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took his horseman’s cloak, and left his tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went abroad into the cold wet fog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dim camp to Peran-Wisa’s tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the black Tartar tents he pass’d, which stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clustering like bee-hives on the low flat strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Oxus, where the summer-floods o’erflow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the sun melts the snows in high Pamir:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the black tents he pass’d, o’er that low strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to a hillock came, a little back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the stream’s brink, the spot where first a boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crossing the stream in summer, scrapes the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men of former times had crown’d the top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a clay fort; but that was fall’n; and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tartars built there Peran-Wisa’s tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dome of laths, and o’er it felts were spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Sohrab came there, and went in, and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the thick-pil’d carpets in the tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And found the old man sleeping on his bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rugs and felts, and near him lay his arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Peran-Wisa heard him, though the step</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was dull’d; for he slept light, an old man’s sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he rose quickly on one arm, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Who art thou? for it is not yet clear dawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak! is there news, or any night alarm?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Sohrab came to the bedside, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou know’st me, Peran-Wisa: it is I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun is not yet risen, and the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep; but I sleep not; all night long I lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tossing and wakeful, and I come to thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so did King Afrasiab bid me seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy counsel, and to heed thee as thy son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Samarkand, before the army march’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will tell thee what my heart desires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou know’st if, since from Azerbaijan first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I came among the Tartars, and bore arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have still serv’d Afrasiab well, and shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At my boy’s years, the courage of a man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This too thou know’st, that, while I still bear on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conquering Tartar ensigns through the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beat the Persians back on every field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seek one man, one man, and one alone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rostam, my father; who I hop’d, should greet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should one day greet, upon some well-fought field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His not unworthy, not inglorious son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So I long hop’d, but him I never find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come then, hear now, and grant me what I ask.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the two armies rest to-day: but I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will challenge forth the bravest Persian lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet me, man to man: if I prevail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rostam will surely hear it; if I fall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old man, the dead need no one, claim no kin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim is the rumour of a common fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where host meets host, and many names are sunk:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of a single combat Fame speaks clear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke: and Peran-Wisa took the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the young man in his, and sigh’d, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O Sohrab, an unquiet heart is thine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst thou not rest among the Tartar chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And share the battle’s common chance with us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who love thee, but must press for ever first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In single fight incurring single risk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find a father thou hast never seen?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That were far best, my son, to stay with us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmurmuring; in our tents, while it is war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when ’tis truce, then in Afrasiab’s towns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if this one desire indeed rules all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek out Rostam⁠—seek him not through fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek him in peace, and carry to his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Sohrab, carry an unwounded son!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But far hence seek him, for he is not here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now it is not as when I was young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Rostam was in front of every fray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now he keeps apart, and sits at home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Sistan, with Zal, his father old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether that his own mighty strength at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feels the abhorr’d approaches of old age;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in some quarrel with the Persian King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There go:⁠—Thou wilt not? Yet my heart forebodes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Danger or death awaits thee on this field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fain would I know thee safe and well, though lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To us: fain therefore send thee hence, in peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek thy father, not seek single fights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain:⁠—but who can keep the lion’s cub</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From ravening? and who govern Rostam’s son?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go: I will grant thee what thy heart desires.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So said he, and dropp’d Sohrab’s hand, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bed, and the warm rugs whereon he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er his chilly limbs his woollen coat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pass’d, and tied his sandals on his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threw a white cloak round him, and he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his right hand a ruler’s staff, no sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his head he plac’d his sheep-skin cap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black, glossy, curl’d, the fleece of Kara-Kul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rais’d the curtain of his tent, and call’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His herald to his side, and went abroad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun, by this, had risen, and clear’d the fog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the broad Oxus and the glittering sands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from their tents the Tartar horsemen fil’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the open plain; so Haman bade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haman, who next to Peran-Wisa rul’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The host, and still was in his lusty prime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their black tents, long files of horse, they stream’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when, some grey November morn, the files,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In marching order spread, of long-neck’d cranes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stream over Qazvin and the southern slopes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Alborz, from the Aralian estuaries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or some frore Caspian reed-bed, southward bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the warm Persian sea-board: so they stream’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tartars of the Oxus, the King’s guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First, with black sheep-skin caps and with long spears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large men, large steeds; who from Bukhara come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Khiva, and ferment the milk of mares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next, the more temperate Turkmens of the south,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tukas, and the lances of Salore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those from Atreck and the Caspian sands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light men, and on light steeds, who only drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The acrid milk of camels, and their wells.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then a swarm of wandering horse, who came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From far, and a more doubtful service own’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tartars of Fergana, from the banks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Jaxartes, men with scanty beards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And close-set skull-caps; and those wilder hordes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who roam o’er Kipchak and the northern waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kalmyks and unkemp’d Kazakhs, tribes who stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearest the Pole, and wandering Kirghizzes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who come on shaggy ponies from Pamir.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These all fil’d out from camp into the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the other side the Persians form’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First a light cloud of horse, Tartars they seem’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ilyats of Khorasan: and behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The royal troops of Persia, horse and foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marshall’d battalions bright in burnish’d steel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Peran-Wisa with his herald came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threading the Tartar squadrons to the front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his staff kept back the foremost ranks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when Farud, who led the Persians, saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Peran-Wisa kept the Tartars back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took his spear, and to the front he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And check’d his ranks, and fix’d them where they stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the old Tartar came upon the sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt the silent hosts, and spake, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Farud, and ye, Persians and Tartars, hear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let there be truce between the hosts to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But choose a champion from the Persian lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight our champion Sohrab, man to man.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As, in the country, on a morn in June,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the dew glistens on the pearled ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shiver runs through the deep corn for joy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, when they heard what Peran-Wisa said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thrill through all the Tartar squadrons ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pride and hope for Sohrab, whom they lov’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But as a troop of peddlers, from Kabul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cross underneath the Indian Caucasus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That vast sky-neighbouring mountain of milk snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winding so high, that, as they mount, they pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long flocks of travelling birds dead on the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chok’d by the air, and scarce can they themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slake their parch’d throats with sugar’d mulberries<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In single file they move, and stop their breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fear they should dislodge the o’erhanging snows⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the pale Persians held their breath with fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to Farud his brother Chiefs came up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To counsel: Gudurz and Zoarrah came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Fariburz, who rul’d the Persian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Second, and was the uncle of the King:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These came and counsell’d; and then Gudurz said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Farud, shame bids us take their challenge up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet champion have we none to match this youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has the wild stag’s foot, the lion’s heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Rostam came last night; aloof he sits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sullen, and has pitch’d his tents apart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him will I seek, and carry to his ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tartar challenge, and this young man’s name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haply he will forget his wrath, and fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand forth the while, and take their challenge up.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So spake he; and Farud stood forth and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Old man, be it agreed as thou hast said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let Sohrab arm, and we will find a man.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke; and Peran-Wisa turn’d, and strode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back through the opening squadrons to his tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But through the anxious Persians Gudurz ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cross’d the camp which lay behind, and reach’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out on the sands beyond it, Rostam’s tents.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of scarlet cloth they were, and glittering gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just pitch’d: the high pavilion in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Rostam’s, and his men lay camp’d around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gudurz enter’d Rostam’s tent, and found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rostam: his morning meal was done, but still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table stood before him, charg’d with food;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A side of roasted sheep, and cakes of bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dark green melons; and there Rostam sate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listless, and held a falcon on his wrist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And play’d with it; but Gudurz came and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him; and he look’d, and saw him stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a cry sprang up and dropp’d the bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greeted Gudurz with both hands, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Welcome! these eyes could see no better sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What news? but sit down first, and eat and drink.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Gudurz stood in the tent-door, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not now! a time will come to eat and drink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not to-day: to-day has other needs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armies are drawn out, and stand at gaze:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For from the Tartars is a challenge brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pick a champion from the Persian lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight their champion⁠—and thou know’st his name⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sohrab men call him, but his birth is hid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Rostam, like thy might is this young man’s!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has the wild stag’s foot, the lion’s heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he is young, and Iran’s Chiefs are old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else too weak; and all eyes turn to thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come down and help us, Rostam, or we lose.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke: but Rostam answer’d with a smile:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go to! if Iran’s Chiefs are old, then I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am older: if the young are weak, the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Errs strangely; for the King, for Kay Khosrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself is young, and honours younger men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lets the agèd moulder to their graves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rostam he loves no more, but loves the young⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young may rise at Sohrab’s vaunts, not I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what care I, though all speak Sohrab’s fame?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For would that I myself had such a son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not that one slight helpless girl I have,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A son so fam’d, so brave, to send to war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I to tarry with the snow-hair’d Zal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father, whom the robber Afghans vex,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clip his borders short, and drive his herds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he has none to guard his weak old age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There would I go, and hang my armour up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with my great name fence that weak old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spend the goodly treasures I have got,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rest my age, and hear of Sohrab’s fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave to death the hosts of thankless kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with these slaughterous hands draw sword no more.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke, and smil’d; and Gudurz made reply:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What then, O Rostam, will men say to this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Sohrab dares our bravest forth, and seeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee most of all, and thou, whom most he seeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hidest thy face? Take heed lest men should say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Like some old miser, Rostam hoards his fame,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>And shuns to peril it with younger men.</em>”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, greatly mov’d, then Rostam made reply:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Gudurz, wherefore dost thou say such words?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest better words than this to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is one more, one less, obscure or fam’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valiant or craven, young or old, to me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are not they mortal, am not I myself?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who for men of naught would do great deeds?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, thou shalt see how Rostam hoards his fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I will fight unknown, and in plain arms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let not men say of Rostam, he was match’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In single fight with any mortal man.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke, and frown’d; and Gudurz turn’d, and ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back quickly through the camp in fear and joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear at his wrath, but joy that Rostam came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Rostam strode to his tent door, and call’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His followers in, and bade them bring his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clad himself in steel: the arms he chose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were plain, and on his shield was no device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only his helm was rich, inlaid with gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the fluted spine atop a plume</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of horsehair wav’d, a scarlet horsehair plume.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So arm’d he issued forth; and Rakhsh, his horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow’d him, like a faithful hound, at heel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rakhsh, whose renown was nois’d through all the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horse, whom Rostam on a foray once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did in Bukhara by the river find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A colt beneath its dam, and drove him home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rear’d him; a bright bay, with lofty crest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dight with a saddle-cloth of broider’d green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crusted with gold, and on the ground were work’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All beasts of chase, all beasts which hunters know:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So follow’d, Rostam left his tents, and cross’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The camp, and to the Persian host appear’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the Persians knew him, and with shouts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail’d; but the Tartars knew not who he was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dear as the wet diver to the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his pale wife who waits and weeps on shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sandy Bahrain, in the Persian Gulf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunging all day in the blue waves, at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having made up his tale of precious pearls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoins her in their hut upon the sands⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So dear to the pale Persians Rostam came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Rostam to the Persian front advanc’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Sohrab arm’d in Haman’s tent, and came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as afield the reapers cut a swath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down through the middle of a rich man’s corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on each side are squares of standing corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the midst a stubble, short and bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So on each side were squares of men, with spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bristling, and in the midst, the open sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rostam came upon the sand, and cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes toward the Tartar tents, and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sohrab come forth, and ey’d him as he came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As some rich woman, on a winter’s morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes through her silken curtains the poor drudge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who with numb blacken’d fingers makes her fire⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At cock-crow, on a starlit winter’s morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the frost flowers the whiten’d window panes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wonders how she lives, and what the thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that poor drudge may be; so Rostam ey’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unknown adventurous Youth, who from afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came seeking Rostam, and defying forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the most valiant chiefs: long he perus’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spirited air, and wonder’d who he was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For very young he seem’d, tenderly rear’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like some young cypress, tall, and dark, and straight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in a queen’s secluded garden throws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its slight dark shadow on the moonlit turf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By midnight, to a bubbling fountain’s sound⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So slender Sohrab seem’d, so softly rear’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a deep pity enter’d Rostam’s soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he beheld him coming; and he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beckon’d to him with his hand, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O thou young man, the air of Heaven is soft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warm, and pleasant; but the grave is cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven’s air is better than the cold dead grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold me: I am vast, and clad in iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tried; and I have stood on many a field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of blood, and I have fought with many a foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never was that field lost, or that foe sav’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Sohrab, wherefore wilt thou rush on death?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be govern’d! quit the Tartar host, and come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Iran, and be as my son to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fight beneath my banner till I die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are no youths in Iran brave as thou.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So he spake, mildly: Sohrab heard his voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty voice of Rostam; and he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His giant figure planted on the sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sole, like some single tower, which a chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has builded on the waste in former years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the robbers; and he saw that head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streak’d with its first grey hairs; hope fill’d his soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he ran forward and embrac’d his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clasp’d his hand within his own, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Oh, by thy father’s head! by thine own soul!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou not Rostam? Speak! art thou not he?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Rostam ey’d askance the kneeling youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn’d away, and spake to his own soul:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Ah me, I muse what this young fox may mean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>False, wily, boastful, are these Tartar boys.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if I now confess this thing he asks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hide it not, but say⁠—<em>Rostam is here</em>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will not yield indeed, nor quit our foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he will find some pretext not to fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And praise my fame, and proffer courteous gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A belt or sword perhaps, and go his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on a feast-tide, in Afrasiab’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Samarkand, he will arise and cry⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I challeng’d once, when the two armies camp’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the Oxus, all the Persian lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cope with me in single fight; but they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrank; only Rostam dar’d: then he and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chang’d gifts, and went on equal terms away.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So will he speak, perhaps, while men applaud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then were the chiefs of Iran sham’d through me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then he turn’d, and sternly spake aloud:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rise! wherefore dost thou vainly question thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Rostam? I am here, whom thou hast call’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By challenge forth: make good thy vaunt, or yield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it with Rostam only thou wouldst fight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rash boy, men look on Rostam’s face and flee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For well I know, that did great Rostam stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before thy face this day, and were reveal’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There would be then no talk of fighting more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But being what I am, I tell thee this;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do thou record it in thine inmost soul:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either thou shalt renounce thy vaunt and yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else thy bones shall strew this sand, till winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bleach them, or Oxus with his summer floods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oxus in summer wash them all away.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke: and Sohrab answer’d, on his feet:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Art thou so fierce? Thou wilt not fright me so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am no girl, to be made pale by words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet this thou hast said well, did Rostam stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here on this field, there were no fighting then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Rostam is far hence, and we stand here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin: thou art more vast, more dread than I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou art prov’d, I know, and I am young⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet Success sways with the breath of Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though thou thinkest that thou knowest sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy victory, yet thou canst not surely know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we are all, like swimmers in the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pois’d on the top of a huge wave of Fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which hangs uncertain to which side to fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whether it will heave us up to land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether it will roll us out to sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back out to sea, to the deep waves of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know not, and no search will make us know:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the event will teach us in its hour.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke; and Rostam answer’d not, but hurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spear: down from the shoulder, down it came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on some partridge in the corn a hawk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That long has tower’d in the airy clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drops like a plummet: Sohrab saw it come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sprang aside, quick as a flash: the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hiss’d, and went quivering down into the sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which it sent flying wide:⁠—then Sohrab threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn, and full struck Rostam’s shield: sharp rang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The iron plates rang sharp, but turn’d the spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rostam seiz’d his club, which none but he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could wield: an unlopp’d trunk it was, and huge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still rough; like those which men in treeless plains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To build them boats fish from the flooded rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hyphasis or Hydaspes, when, high up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By their dark springs, the wind in winter-time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has made in Himalayan forests wrack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strewn the channels with torn boughs; so huge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The club which Rostam lifted now, and struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One stroke; but again Sohrab sprang aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lithe as the glancing snake, and the club came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thundering to earth, and leapt from Rostam’s hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rostam follow’d his own blow, and fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his knees, and with his fingers clutch’d the sand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now might Sohrab have unsheath’d his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pierc’d the mighty Rostam while he lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dizzy, and on his knees, and chok’d with sand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he look’d on, and smil’d, nor bar’d his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But courteously drew back, and spoke, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Thou strik’st too hard: that club of thine will float</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the summer floods, and not my bones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rise, and be not wroth; not wroth am I:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, when I see thee, wrath forsakes my soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou say’st, thou art not Rostam: be it so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who art thou then, that canst so touch my soul?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boy as I am, I have seen battles too;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have waded foremost in their bloody waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heard their hollow roar of dying men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never was my heart thus touch’d before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are they from Heaven, these softenings of the heart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou old warrior, let us yield to Heaven!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, plant we here in earth our angry spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make a truce, and sit upon this sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pledge each other in red wine, like friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt talk to me of Rostam’s deeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are enough foes in the Persian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I may meet, and strike, and feel no pang;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Champions enough Afrasiab has, whom thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mayst fight; fight them, when they confront thy spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But oh, let there be peace ’twixt thee and me!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He ceas’d: but while he spake, Rostam had risen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood erect, trembling with rage: his club</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left to lie, but had regain’d his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose fiery point now in his mail’d right-hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blaz’d bright and baleful, like that autumn Star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The baleful sign of fevers: dust had soil’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His stately crest, and dimm’d his glittering arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breast heav’d; his lips foam’d; and twice his voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was chok’d with rage: at last these words broke way:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Girl! nimble with thy feet, not with thy hands!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curl’d minion, dancer, coiner of sweet words!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fight; let me hear thy hateful voice no more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art not in Afrasiab’s gardens now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Tartar girls, with whom thou art wont to dance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But on the Oxus sands, and in the dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battle, and with me, who make no play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war: I fight it out, and hand to hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak not to me of truce, and pledge, and wine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember all thy valour; try thy feints</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cunning: all the pity I had is gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because thou hast sham’d me before both the hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy light skipping tricks, and thy girl’s wiles.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke; and Sohrab kindled at his taunts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he too drew his sword: at once they rush’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together, as two eagles on one prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come rushing down together from the clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One from the east, one from the west: their shields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dash’d with a clang together, and a din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose, such as that the sinewy woodcutters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make often in the forest’s heart at morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hewing axes, crashing trees: such blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rostam and Sohrab on each other hail’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you would say that sun and stars took part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that unnatural conflict; for a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew suddenly in Heaven, and dark’d the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the fighters’ heads; and a wind rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under their feet, and moaning swept the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a sandy whirlwind wrapp’d the pair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gloom they twain were wrapp’d, and they alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For both the on-looking hosts on either hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood in broad daylight, and the sky was pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun sparkled on the Oxus stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the gloom they fought, with bloodshot eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And labouring breath; first Rostam struck the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Sohrab held stiff out: the steel-spik’d spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rent the tough plates, but fail’d to reach the skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rostam pluck’d it back with angry groan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Sohrab with his sword smote Rostam’s helm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor clove its steel quite through; but all the crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shore away, and that proud horsehair plume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never till now defil’d, sunk to the dust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rostam bow’d his head; but then the gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew blacker: thunder rumbled in the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lightnings rent the cloud; and Rakhsh, the horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stood at hand, utter’d a dreadful cry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No horse’s cry was that, most like the roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some pain’d desert-lion, who all day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath trail’d the hunter’s javelin in his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And comes at night to die upon the sand:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two hosts heard that cry, and quak’d for fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Oxus curdled as it cross’d his stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Sohrab heard, and quail’d not, but rush’d on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And struck again; and again Rostam bow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head; but this time all the blade, like glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang in a thousand shivers on the helm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the hand the hilt remain’d alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Rostam raised his head: his dreadful eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glar’d, and he shook on high his menacing spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shouted, <em>Rostam!</em> Sohrab heard that shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shrank amaz’d: back he recoil’d one step,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scann’d with blinking eyes the advancing Form:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he stood bewilder’d; and he dropp’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His covering shield, and the spear pierc’d his side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He reel’d, and staggering back, sunk to the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the gloom dispers’d, and the wind fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bright sun broke forth, and melted all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cloud; and the two armies saw the pair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw Rostam standing, safe upon his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Sohrab, wounded, on the bloody sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, with a bitter smile, Rostam began:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sohrab, thou thoughtest in thy mind to kill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Persian lord this day, and strip his corpse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear thy trophies to Afrasiab’s tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else that the great Rostam would come down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself to fight, and that thy wiles would move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart to take a gift, and let thee go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then that all the Tartar host would praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy courage or thy craft, and spread thy fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glad thy father in his weak old age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fool! thou art slain, and by an unknown man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dearer to the red jackals shalt thou be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to thy friends, and to thy father old.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with a fearless mien, Sohrab replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Unknown thou art; yet thy fierce vaunt is vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou dost not slay me, proud and boastful man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No! Rostam slays me, and this filial heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For were I match’d with ten such men as thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I were that which till to-day I was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They should be lying here, I standing there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that belovèd name unnerv’d my arm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That name, and something, I confess, in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which troubles all my heart, and made my shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall; and thy spear transfix’d an unarm’d foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou boastest, and insult’st my fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hear thou this, fierce Man, tremble to hear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Rostam shall avenge my death!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father, whom I seek through all the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shall avenge my death, and punish thee!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As when some hunter in the spring hath found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A breeding eagle sitting on her nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the craggy isle of a hill lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pierc’d her with an arrow as she rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And follow’d her to find her where she fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off;⁠—anon her mate comes winging back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hunting, and a great way off descries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His huddling young left sole; at that, he checks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His pinion, and with short uneasy sweeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circles above his eyry, with loud screams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chiding his mate back to her nest; but she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies dying, with the arrow in her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some far stony gorge out of his ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heap of fluttering feathers: never more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall the lake glass her, flying over it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never the black and dripping precipices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echo her stormy scream as she sails by:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As that poor bird flies home, nor knows his loss⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Rostam knew not his own loss, but stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over his dying son, and knew him not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, with a cold incredulous voice, he said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What prate is this of fathers and revenge?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Rostam never had a son.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with a failing voice, Sohrab replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah yes, he had! and that lost son am I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely the news will one day reach his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reach Rostam, where he sits, and tarries long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere, I know not where, but far from here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pierce him like a stab, and make him leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To arms, and cry for vengeance upon thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce Man, bethink thee, for an only son!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What will that grief, what will that vengeance be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, could I live, till I that grief had seen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet him I pity not so much, but her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother, who in Azerbaijan dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that old King, her father, who grows grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With age, and rules over the valiant Koords.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her most I pity, who no more will see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sohrab returning from the Tartar camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With spoils and honour, when the war is done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a dark rumour will be bruited up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From tribe to tribe, until it reach her ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then will that defenceless woman learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Sohrab will rejoice her sight no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that in battle with a nameless foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the far-distant Oxus, he is slain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke; and as he ceas’d he wept aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking of her he left, and his own death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke; but Rostam listen’d, plung’d in thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor did he yet believe it was his son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who spoke, although he call’d back names he knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he had had sure tidings that the babe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which was in Azerbaijan born to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been a puny girl, no boy at all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that sad mother sent him word, for fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rostam should seek the boy, to train in arms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so he deem’d that either Sohrab took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a false boast, the style of Rostam’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that men gave it him, to swell his fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So deem’d he; yet he listen’d, plunged in thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his soul set to grief, as the vast tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the bright rocking Ocean sets to shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the full moon: tears gather’d in his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he remember’d his own early youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all its bounding rapture; as, at dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Shepherd from his mountain lodge descries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A far, bright City, smitten by the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through many rolling clouds:⁠—so Rostam saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His youth; saw Sohrab’s mother, in her bloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that old King, her father, who lov’d well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wandering guest, and gave him his fair child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy; and all the pleasant life they led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They three, in that long-distant summer-time⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The castle, and the dewy woods, and hunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hound, and morn on those delightful hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Azerbaijan. And he saw that Youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of age and looks to be his own dear son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piteous and lovely, lying on the sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like some rich hyacinth, which by the scythe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an unskilful gardener has been cut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mowing the garden grass-plots near its bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lies, a fragrant tower of purple bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the mown, dying grass;⁠—so Sohrab lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely in death, upon the common sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rostam gaz’d on him with grief, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O Sohrab, thou indeed art such a son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Rostam, wert thou his, might well have lov’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet here thou errest, Sohrab, or else men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have told thee false;⁠—thou art not Rostam’s son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Rostam had no son: one child he had⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one⁠—a girl: who with her mother now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plies some light female task, nor dreams of us⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of us she dreams not, nor of wounds, nor war.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Sohrab answer’d him in wrath; for now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The anguish of the deep-fix’d spear grew fierce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he desired to draw forth the steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let the blood flow free, and so to die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But first he would convince his stubborn foe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, rising sternly on one arm, he said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Man, who art thou who dost deny my words?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth sits upon the lips of dying men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Falsehood, while I liv’d, was far from mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I tell thee, prick’d upon this arm I bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seal which Rostam to my mother gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she might prick it on the babe she bore.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke: and all the blood left Rostam’s cheeks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his knees totter’d, and he smote his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against his breast, his heavy mailed hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the hard iron corslet clank’d aloud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to his heart he press’d the other hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a hollow voice he spake, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Sohrab, that were a proof which could not lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou show this, then art thou Rostam’s son.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, with weak hasty fingers, Sohrab loos’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His belt, and near the shoulder bar’d his arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And show’d a sign in faint vermilion points</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prick’d: as a cunning workman, in Peking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pricks with vermilion some clear porcelain vase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An emperor’s gift⁠—at early morn he paints,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all day long, and, when night comes, the lamp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lights up his studious forehead and thin hands:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So delicately prick’d the sign appear’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Sohrab’s arm, the sign of Rostam’s seal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was that griffin, which of old rear’d Zal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rostam’s great father, whom they left to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A helpless babe, among the mountain-rocks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him that kind Creature found, and rear’d, and lov’d⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Rostam took it for his glorious sign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Sohrab bar’d that image on his arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And himself scann’d it long with mournful eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he touch’d it with his hand and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How say’st thou? Is that sign the proper sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Rostam’s son, or of some other man’s?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke: but Rostam gaz’d, and gaz’d, and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speechless; and then he utter’d one sharp cry⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>O Boy⁠—thy Father!</em>⁠—and his voice chok’d there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then a dark cloud pass’d before his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his head swam, and he sunk down to earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Sohrab crawl’d to where he lay, and cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms about his neck, and kiss’d his lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with fond faltering fingers strok’d his cheeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trying to call him back to life: and life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came back to Rostam, and he op’d his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they stood wide with horror; and he seiz’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In both his hands the dust which lay around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threw it on his head, and smirch’d his hair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hair, and face, and beard, and glittering arms:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strong convulsive groanings shook his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his sobs chok’d him; and he clutch’d his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To draw it, and for ever let life out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Sohrab saw his thought, and held his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a soothing voice he spoke, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Father, forbear; for I but meet to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doom which at my birth was written down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Heaven, and thou art Heaven’s unconscious hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely my heart cried out that it was thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first I saw thee; and thy heart spoke too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know it: but Fate trod those promptings down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under its iron heel; Fate, Fate engag’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strife, and hurl’d me on my father’s spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let us speak no more of this: I find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father; let me feel that I have found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, sit beside me on this sand, and take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My head betwixt thy hands, and kiss my cheeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wash them with thy tears, and say, <em>My Son!</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick! quick! for number’d are my sands of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swift; for like the lightning to this field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I came, and like the wind I go away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden, and swift, and like a passing wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it was writ in Heaven that this should be.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So said he: and his voice releas’d the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Rostam, and his tears broke forth; he cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms round his son’s neck, and wept aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kiss’d him. And awe fell on both the hosts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they saw Rostam’s grief; and Rakhsh, the horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his head bowing to the ground, and mane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeping the dust, came near, and in mute woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First to the one then to the other mov’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head, as if inquiring what their grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might mean; and from his dark, compassionate eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The big warm tears roll’d down, and cak’d the sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Rostam chid him with stern voice, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Rakhsh, now thou grievest; but, O Rakhsh, thy feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should then have rotted on thy nimble joints,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first they bore thy Master to this field.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Sohrab look’d upon the horse and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is this then Rakhsh? How often, in past days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother told me of thee, thou brave Steed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My terrible father’s terrible horse; and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should one day find thy lord and thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, let me lay my hand upon thy mane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Rakhsh, thou art more fortunate than I;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou hast gone where I shall never go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snuff’d the breezes of my father’s home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou hast trod the sands of Sistan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seen the River of Helmand, and the Lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Zirrah; and the aged Zal himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has often strok’d thy neck, and given thee food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corn in a golden platter soak’d with wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said⁠—‘O Rakhsh! bear Rostam well!’⁠—but I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have never known my grandsire’s furrow’d face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor seen his lofty house in Sistan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor slak’d my thirst at the clear Helmand stream:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lodg’d among my father’s foes, and seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afrasiab’s cities only, Samarkand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bukhara, and lone Khiva in the waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black Turkmen tents; and only drunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The desert rivers, Marghab and Tejen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kohik, and where the Kalmyks feed their sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The northern Sir; and this great Oxus stream⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellow Oxus, by whose brink I die.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with a heavy groan, Rostam replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oh, that its waves were flowing over me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh that I saw its grains of yellow silt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll tumbling in the current o’er my head!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with a grave mild voice, Sohrab replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Desire not that, my father; thou must live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For some are born to do great deeds, and live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As some are born to be obscur’d, and die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do thou the deeds I die too young to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reap a second glory in thine age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art my father, and thy gain is mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But come: thou seest this great host of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which follow me; I pray thee, slay not these:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me entreat for them: what have they done?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They follow’d me, my hope, my fame, my star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them all cross the Oxus back in peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But me thou must bear hence, not send with them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But carry me with thee to Sistan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And place me on a bed, and mourn for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, and the snow-hair’d Zal, and all thy friends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou must lay me in that lovely earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heap a stately mound above my bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plant a far-seen pillar over all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so the passing horseman on the waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May see my tomb a great way off, and say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Sohrab, the mighty Rostam’s son, lies there,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Whom his great father did in ignorance kill⁠—</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I be not forgotten in my grave.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with a mournful voice, Rostam replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fear not; as thou hast said, Sohrab, my son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shall it be: for I will burn my tents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quit the host, and bear thee hence with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carry thee away to Sistan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And place thee on a bed, and mourn for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the snow-headed Zal, and all my friends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will lay thee in that lovely earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heap a stately mound above thy bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plant a far-seen pillar over all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And men shall not forget thee in thy grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will spare thy host: yea, let them go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them all cross the Oxus back in peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What should I do with slaying any more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For would that all whom I have ever slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might be once more alive; my bitterest foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they who were call’d champions in their time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through whose death I won that fame I have;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I were nothing but a common man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poor, mean soldier, and without renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So thou mightest live too, my Son, my Son!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or rather would that I, even I myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might now be lying on this bloody sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near death, and by an ignorant stroke of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not thou of mine; and I might die, not thou;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, not thou, be borne to Sistan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Zal might weep above my grave, not thine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say⁠—<em>O son, I weep thee not too sore,</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>For willingly, I know, thou met’st thine end.</em>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now in blood and battles was my youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full of blood and battles is my age;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I shall never end this life of blood.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, at the point of death, Sohrab replied:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A life of blood indeed, thou dreadful Man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou shalt yet have peace; only not now:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not yet: but thou shalt have it on that day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou shalt sail in a high-masted Ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou and the other peers of Kay Khosrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning home over the salt blue sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From laying thy dear Master in his grave.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Rostam gaz’d in Sohrab’s face, and said:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Soon be that day, my Son, and deep that sea!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till then, if Fate so wills, let me endure.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spoke; and Sohrab smil’d on him, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear, and drew it from his side, and eas’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wound’s imperious anguish: but the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came welling from the open gash, and life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow’d with the stream: all down his cold white side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crimson torrent ran, dim now, and soil’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the soil’d tissue of white violets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left, freshly gather’d, on their native bank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By romping children, whom their nurses call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the hot fields at noon: his head droop’d low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His limbs grew slack; motionless, white, he lay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White, with eyes closed; only when heavy gasps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep, heavy gasps, quivering through all his frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Convuls’d him back to life, he open’d them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fix’d them feebly on his father’s face:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till now all strength was ebb’d, and from his limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwillingly the spirit fled away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regretting the warm mansion which it left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And youth, and bloom, and this delightful world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, on the bloody sand, Sohrab lay dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the great Rostam drew his horseman’s cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down o’er his face, and sate by his dead son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As those black granite pillars, once high-rear’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Jemshid in Persepolis, to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His house, now, mid their broken flights of steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie prone, enormous, down the mountain side⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in the sand lay Rostam by his son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And night came down over the solemn waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the two gazing hosts, and that sole pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darken’d all; and a cold fog, with night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crept from the Oxus. Soon a hum arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of a great assembly loos’d, and fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to twinkle through the fog: for now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both armies mov’d to camp, and took their meal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Persians took it on the open sands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Southward; the Tartars by the river marge:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rostam and his son were left alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the majestic River floated on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the mist and hum of that low land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the frosty starlight, and there mov’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoicing, through the hush’d Chorasmian waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the solitary moon: he flow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right for the Polar Star, past Orgunjè,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brimming, and bright, and large: then sands begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hem his watery march, and dam his streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And split his currents; that for many a league</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shorn and parcell’d Oxus strains along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through beds of sand and matted rushy isles⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oxus, forgetting the bright speed he had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his high mountain cradle in Pamir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A foil’d circuitous wanderer:⁠—till at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long’d-for dash of waves is heard, and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His luminous home of waters opens, bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tranquil, from whose floor the new-bath’d stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Emerge, and shine upon the Aral Sea.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-scholar-gipsy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Scholar Gipsy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Go, for they call you, Shepherd, from the hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Go, Shepherd, and untie the wattled cotes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">No longer leave thy wistful flock unfed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor let thy bawling fellows rack their throats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nor the cropp’d herbage shoot another head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But when the fields are still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the tired men and dogs all gone to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And only the white sheep are sometimes seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Cross and recross the strips of moon-blanch’d green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Come, Shepherd, and again renew the quest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here, where the reaper was at work of late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this high field’s dark corner, where he leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">His coat, his basket, and his earthen cruse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the sun all morning binds the sheaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Then here, at noon, comes back his stores to use;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Here will I sit and wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While to my ear from uplands far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The bleating of the folded flocks is borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With distant cries of reapers in the corn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">All the live murmur of a summer’s day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Screen’d is this nook o’er the high, half-reap’d field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here till sun-down, Shepherd, will I be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Through the thick corn the scarlet poppies peep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And round green roots and yellowing stalks I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Pale pink convolvulus in tendrils creep:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And air-swept lindens yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their scent, and rustle down their perfum’d showers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of bloom on the bent grass where I am laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And bower me from the August sun with shade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And the eye travels down to Oxford’s tower:.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And near me on the grass lies Glanvil’s book⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come, let me read the oft-read tale again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The story of the Oxford scholar poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of pregnant parts and quick inventive brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who, tir’d of knocking at Preferment’s door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">One summer morn forsook</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His friends, and went to learn the Gipsy lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And roam’d the world with that wild brotherhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And came, as most men deem’d, to little good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But came to Oxford and his friends no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But once, years after, in the country lanes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two scholars whom at college erst he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Met him, and of his way of life inquir’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereat he answer’d, that the Gipsy crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">His mates, had arts to rule as they desir’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">The workings of men’s brains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they can bind them to what thoughts they will:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">“And I,” he said, “the secret of their art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When fully learn’d, will to the world impart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But it needs heaven-sent moments for this skill.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This said, he left them, and return’d no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But rumours hung about the country side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That the lost Scholar long was seen to stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seen by rare glimpses, pensive and tongue-tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In hat of antique shape, and cloak of grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">The same the Gipsies wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shepherds had met him on the Hurst in spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">At some lone alehouse in the Berkshire moors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">On the warm ingle bench, the smock-frock’d boors</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Had found him seated at their entering,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, mid their drink and clatter, he would fly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I myself seem half to know thy looks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And put the shepherds, Wanderer, on thy trace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And boys who in lone wheatfields scare the rooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I ask if thou hast pass’d their quiet place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Or in my boat I lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moor’d to the cool bank in the summer heats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Mid wide grass meadows which the sunshine fills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And watch the warm green-muffled Cumner hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And wonder if thou haunt’st their shy retreats.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For most, I know, thou lov’st retired ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee, at the ferry, Oxford riders blithe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Returning home on summer nights, have met</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crossing the stripling Thames at Bab-lock-hithe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Trailing in the cool stream thy fingers wet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">As the slow punt swings round:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leaning backward in a pensive dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And fostering in thy lap a heap of flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Pluck’d in shy fields and distant Wychwood bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And thine eyes resting on the moonlit stream:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then they land, and thou art seen no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Maidens who from the distant hamlets come</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To dance around the Fyfield elm in May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oft through the darkening fields have seen thee roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or cross a stile into the public way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Oft thou hast given them store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of flowers⁠—the frail-leaf’d, white anemone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Dark bluebells drench’d with dews of summer eves⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And purple orchises with spotted leaves⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But none hath words she can report of thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, above Godstow Bridge, when hay-time’s here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In June, and many a scythe in sunshine flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Men who through those wide fields of breezy grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where black-wing’d swallows haunt the glittering Thames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To bathe in the abandon’d lasher pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Have often pass’d thee near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sitting upon the river bank o’ergrown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Mark’d thine outlandish garb, thy figure spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy dark vague eyes, and soft abstracted air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But, when they came from bathing, thou wert gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At some lone homestead in the Cumner hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where at her open door the housewife darns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou hast been seen, or hanging on a gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To watch the threshers in the mossy barns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Children, who early range these slopes and late</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">For cresses from the rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have known thee eying, all an April day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The springing pastures and the feeding kine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And mark’d thee, when the stars come out and shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Through the long dewy grass move slow away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In Autumn, on the skirts of Bagley Wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where most the Gipsies by the turf-edg’d way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Pitch their smok’d tents, and every bush you see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With scarlet patches tagg’d and shreds of grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Above the forest ground call’d Thessaly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">The blackbird picking food</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sees thee, nor stops his meal, nor fears at all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">So often has he known thee past him stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Rapt, twirling in thy hand a wither’d spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And waiting for the spark from Heaven to fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And once, in winter, on the causeway chill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where home through flooded fields foot-travellers go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Have I not pass’d thee on the wooden bridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wrapt in thy cloak and battling with the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy face towards Hinksey and its wintry ridge?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And thou hast climb’d the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gain’d the white brow of the Cumner range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Turn’d once to watch, while thick the snowflakes fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The line of festal light in Christ-Church hall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Then sought thy straw in some sequester’d grange.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But what⁠—I dream! Two hundred years are flown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since first thy story ran through Oxford halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the grave Glanvil did the tale inscribe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou wert wander’d from the studious walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To learn strange arts, and join a Gipsy tribe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And thou from earth art gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long since, and in some quiet churchyard laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Some country nook, where o’er thy unknown grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Tall grasses and white flowering nettles wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Under a dark red-fruited yew-tree’s shade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>—No, no, thou hast not felt the lapse of hours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For what wears out the life of mortal men?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’Tis that from change to change their being rolls:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis that repeated shocks, again, again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Exhaust the energy of strongest souls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And numb the elastic powers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till having us’d our nerves with bliss and teen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And tir’d upon a thousand schemes our wit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the just-pausing Genius we remit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Our worn-out life, and are⁠—what we have been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou hast not liv’d, why should’st thou perish, so?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou hadst <em>one</em> aim, <em>one</em> business, <em>one</em> desire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Else wert thou long since number’d with the dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Else hadst thou spent, like other men, thy fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The generations of thy peers are fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And we ourselves shall go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But thou possessest an immortal lot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And we imagine thee exempt from age</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And living as thou liv’st on Glanvil’s page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Because thou hadst⁠—what we, alas, have not!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For early didst thou leave the world, with powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fresh, undiverted to the world without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Firm to their mark, not spent on other things;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Free from the sick fatigue, the languid doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which much to have tried, in much been baffled, brings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">O Life unlike to ours!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fluctuate idly without term or scope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of whom each strives, nor knows for what he strives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And each half lives a hundred different lives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Who wait like thee, but not, like thee, in hope.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou waitest for the spark from Heaven: and we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vague half-believers of our casual creeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who never deeply felt, nor clearly will’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose insight never has borne fruit in deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whose weak resolves never have been fulfill’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">For whom each year we see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breeds new beginnings, disappointments new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who hesitate and falter life away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And lose to-morrow the ground won to-day⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Ah, do not we, Wanderer, await it too?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, we await it, but it still delays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then we suffer; and amongst us One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who most has suffer’d, takes dejectedly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His seat upon the intellectual throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And all his store of sad experience he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Lays bare of wretched days;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tells us his misery’s birth and growth and signs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And how the dying spark of hope was fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And how the breast was sooth’d, and how the head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And all his hourly varied anodynes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This for our wisest: and we others pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wish the long unhappy dream would end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And waive all claim to bliss, and try to bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With close-lipp’d Patience for our only friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sad Patience, too near neighbour to Despair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But none has hope like thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou through the fields and through the woods dost stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Roaming the country side, a truant boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nursing thy project in unclouded joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And every doubt long blown by time away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O born in days when wits were fresh and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And life ran gaily as the sparkling Thames;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Before this strange disease of modern life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With its sick hurry, its divided aims,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Its heads o’ertax’d, its palsied hearts, was rife⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Fly hence, our contact fear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still fly, plunge deeper in the bowering wood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Averse, as Dido did with gesture stern</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From her false friend’s approach in Hades turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Wave us away, and keep thy solitude.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still nursing the unconquerable hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still clutching the inviolable shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With a free onward impulse brushing through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By night, the silver’d branches of the glade⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Far on the forest skirts, where none pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">On some mild pastoral slope</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Emerge, and resting on the moonlit pales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Freshen thy flowers, as in former years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With dew, or listen with enchanted ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">From the dark dingles, to the nightingales.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But fly our paths, our feverish contact fly!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For strong the infection of our mental strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which, though it gives no bliss, yet spoils for rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we should win thee from thy own fair life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Like us distracted, and like us unblest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Soon, soon thy cheer would die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy hopes grow timorous, and unfix’d thy powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And thy clear aims be cross and shifting made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And then thy glad perennial youth would fade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Fade, and grow old at last, and die like ours.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then fly our greetings, fly our speech and smiles!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—As some grave Tyrian trader, from the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Descried at sunrise an emerging prow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifting the cool-hair’d creepers stealthily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The fringes of a southward-facing brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Among the Aegaean isles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw the merry Grecian coaster come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Freighted with amber grapes, and Chian wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Green, bursting figs, and tunnies steep’d in brine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And knew the intruders on his ancient home,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The young light-hearted Masters of the waves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And snatch’d his rudder, and shook out more sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And day and night held on indignantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er the blue Midland waters with the gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Betwixt the Syrtes and soft Sicily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">To where the Atlantic raves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outside the Western Straits, and unbent sails</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">There, where down cloudy cliffs, through sheets of foam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Shy traffickers, the dark Iberians come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And on the beach undid his corded bales.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dream" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dream</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Was it a dream? We sail’d, I thought we sail’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Martin and I, down a green Alpine stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under o’erhanging pines; the morning sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the wet umbrage of their glossy tops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the red pinings of their forest floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew a warm scent abroad; behind the pines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountain skirts, with all their sylvan change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bright-leaf’d chestnuts, and moss’d walnut-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the frail scarlet-berried ash, began.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiss chalets glitter’d on the dewy slopes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from some swarded shelf high up, there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Notes of wild pastoral music: over all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang’d, diamond-bright, the eternal wall of snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the mossy rocks at the stream’s edge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back’d by the pines, a plank-built cottage stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright in the sun; the climbing gourd-plant’s leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muffled its walls, and on the stone-strewn roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay the warm golden gourds; golden, within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the eaves, peer’d rows of Indian corn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shot beneath the cottage with the stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the brown rude-carv’d balcony two Forms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came forth⁠—Olivia’s, Marguerite! and thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad were they both in white, flowers in their breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straw hats bedeck’d their heads, with ribbons blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which wav’d, and on their shoulders fluttering play’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw us, they conferr’d; their bosoms heav’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And more than mortal impulse fill’d their eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lips mov’d; their white arms, wav’d eagerly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flash’d once, like falling streams:⁠—we rose, we gaz’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One moment, on the rapid’s top, our boat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung pois’d⁠—and then the darting River of Life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud thundering, bore us by: swift, swift it foam’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black under cliffs it rac’d, round headlands shone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon the plank’d cottage ’mid the sun-warm’d pines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faded, the moss, the rocks; us burning Plains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bristled with cities, us the Sea receiv’d.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="requiescat" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Requiescat</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Strew on her roses, roses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And never a spray of yew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In quiet she reposes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! would that I did too.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her mirth the world required:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She bath’d it in smiles of glee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her heart was tired, tired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now they let her be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her life was turning, turning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In mazes of heat and sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for peace her soul was yearning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now peace laps her round.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her cabin’d, ample Spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It flutter’d and fail’d for breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-night it doth inherit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vasty Hall of Death.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="philomela" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Philomela<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Hark! ah, the Nightingale!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tawny-throated!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hark! from that moonlit cedar what a burst!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What triumph! hark⁠—what pain!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Wanderer from a Grecian shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, after many years, in distant lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still nourishing in thy bewilder’d brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wild, unquench’d, deep-sunken, old-world pain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say, will it never heal?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And can this fragrant lawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its cool trees, and night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sweet, tranquil Thames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moonshine, and the dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy rack’d heart and brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afford no balm?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Dost thou to-night behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, through the moonlight on this English grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unfriendly palace in the Thracian wild?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dost thou again peruse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hot cheeks and sear’d eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The too clear web, and thy dumb Sister’s shame?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dost thou once more assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy flight, and feel come over thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor Fugitive, the feathery change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more, and once more seem to make resound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With love and hate, triumph and agony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lone Daulis, and the high Cephissian vale?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Listen, Eugenia⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How thick the bursts come crowding through the leaves!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again⁠—thou hearest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eternal Passion!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eternal Pain!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="theklas-answer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Thekla’s Answer</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">From Schiller</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Where I am, thou ask’st, and where I wended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When my fleeting shadow pass’d from thee?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am I not concluded now, and ended?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have not life and love been granted me?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ask, where now those nightingales are singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, of late, on the soft nights of May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set thine ears with soul-fraught music ringing⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only, while their love liv’d, lasted they.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Find I him, for whom I had to sever?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doubt it not, we met, and we are one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, where what is join’d, is join’d for ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, where tears are never more to run.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There thou too shalt live with us together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thou too hast borne the love we bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, from sin deliver’d, dwells my Father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Track’d by Murder’s bloody sword no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There he feels, it was no dream deceiving</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lur’d him starwards to uplift his eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God doth match his gifts to man’s believing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believe, and thou shalt find the Holy nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All thou augurest here of lovely seeming</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There shall find fulfilment in its day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dare, O Friend, be wandering, dare be dreaming;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lofty thought lies oft in childish play.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="balder-dead" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Balder Dead<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a></h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">An Episode</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="balder-dead-1">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Sending</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So on the floor lay Balder dead; and round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay thickly strewn swords, axes, darts, and spears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which all the Gods in sport had idly thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Balder, whom no weapon pierc’d or clove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in his breast stood fixt the fatal bough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mistletoe, which Lok the Accuser gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Hoder, and unwitting Hoder threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst that alone had Balder’s life no charm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the Gods and all the Heroes came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stood round Balder on the bloody floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping and wailing; and Valhalla rang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to its golden roof with sobs and cries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the tables stood the untasted meats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the horns and gold-rimm’d skulls the wine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now would Night have fall’n, and found them yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wailing; but otherwise was Odin’s will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus the Father of the Ages spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Enough of tears, ye Gods, enough of wail!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to lament in was Valhalla made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any here might weep for Balder’s death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I most might weep, his Father; such a son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lose to-day, so bright, so lov’d a God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he has met that doom which long ago</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Nornies, when his mother bare him, spun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Fate set seal, that so his end must be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balder has met his death, and ye survive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weep him an hour; but what can grief avail?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ye yourselves, ye Gods, shall meet your doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All ye who hear me, and inhabit Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I too, Odin too, the Lord of all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ours we shall not meet, when that day comes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With women’s tears and weak complaining cries⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should we meet another’s portion so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather it fits you, having wept your hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cold dry eyes, and hearts compos’d and stern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To live, as erst, your daily life in Heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By me shall vengeance on the murderer Lok,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Foe, the Accuser, whom, though Gods, we hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be strictly car’d for, in the appointed day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile, to-morrow, when the morning dawns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring wood to the seashore to Balder’s ship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the deck build high a funeral pile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the top lay Balder’s corpse, and put</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fire to the wood, and send him out to sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To burn; for that is what the dead desire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So having spoke, the King of Gods arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mounted his horse Sleipner, whom he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the hall of Heaven he rode away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Lidskialf, and sate upon his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Mount, from whence his eye surveys the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far from Heaven he turn’d his shining orbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look on Midgard, and the earth, and men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the conjuring Lapps he bent his gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom antler’d reindeer pull over the snow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the Finns, the gentlest of mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair men, who live in holes under the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did he look once more to Ida’s plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor towards Valhalla, and the sorrowing Gods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well he knew the Gods would heed his word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cease to mourn, and think of Balder’s pyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But in Valhalla all the Gods went back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From around Balder, all the Heroes went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left his body stretch’d upon the floor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on their golden chairs they sate again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the tables, in the hall of Heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And before each the cooks who serv’d them plac’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New messes of the boar Serimner’s flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Valkyries crown’d their horns with mead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So they, with pent-up hearts and tearless eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wailing no more, in silence ate and drank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Twilight fell, and sacred Night came on.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But the blind Hoder left the feasting Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Odin’s hall, and went through Asgard streets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And past the haven where the Gods have moor’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ships, and through the gate, beyond the wall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though sightless, yet his own mind led the God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to the margin of the roaring sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He came, and sadly went along the sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the waves and black o’erhanging cliffs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where in and out the screaming seafowl fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until he came to where a gully breaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the cliff wall, and a fresh stream runs down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the high moors behind, and meets the sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, in the glen Fensaler stands, the house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Frea, honour’d Mother of the Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shows its lighted windows to the main.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There he went up, and pass’d the open doors:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the hall he found those women old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prophetesses, who by rite eterne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Frea’s hearth feed high the sacred fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both night and day; and by the inner wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her golden chair the Mother sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With folded hands, revolving things to come:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her drew Hoder near, and spake, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Mother, a child of bale thou bar’st in me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, first, thou barest me with blinded eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sightless and helpless, wandering weak in Heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after that, of ignorant witless mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou barest me, and unforeseeing soul:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I alone must take the branch from Lok,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Foe, the Accuser, whom, though Gods, we hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast it at the dear-lov’d Balder’s breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At whom the Gods in sport their weapons threw⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst that alone had Balder’s life no charm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now therefore what to attempt, or whither fly?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who will bear my hateful sight in Heaven?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I, O mother, bring them Balder back?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or⁠—for thou know’st the Fates, and things allow’d⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I with Hela’s power a compact strike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make exchange, and give my life for his?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spoke: the Mother of the Gods replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hoder, ill-fated, child of bale, my son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sightless in soul and eye, what words are these?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one, long portion’d with his doom of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should change his lot, and fill another’s life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hela yield to this, and let him go!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Balder Death hath laid her hand, not thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor doth she count this life a price for that.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For many Gods in Heaven, not thou alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would freely die to purchase Balder back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wend themselves to Hela’s gloomy realm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For not so gladsome is that life in Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Gods and Heroes lead, in feast and fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting the darkness of the final times,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one should grudge its loss for Balder’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balder their joy, so bright, so lov’d a God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Fate withstands, and laws forbid this way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in my secret mind one way I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor do I judge if it shall win or fail:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But much must still be tried, which shall but fail.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And the blind Hoder answer’d her, and said:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What way is this, O Mother, that thou show’st?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it a matter which a God might try?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And straight the Mother of the Gods replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“There is a way which leads to Hela’s realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untrodden, lonely, far from light and Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who goes that way must take no other horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ride, but Sleipner, Odin’s horse, alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor must he choose that common path of Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which every day they come and go in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the bridge Bifrost, where is Heimdall’s watch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past Midgard Fortress, down to Earth and men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he must tread a dark untravell’d road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which branches from the north of Heaven, and ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine days, nine nights, toward the northern ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through valleys deep-engulph’d, with roaring streams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he will reach on the tenth morn a bridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which spans with golden arches Giall’s stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not Bifrost, but that bridge a Damsel keeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who tells the passing troops of dead their way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the low shore of ghosts, and Hela’s realm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she will bid him northward steer his course:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he will journey through no lighted land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor see the sun arise, nor see it set;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he must ever watch the northern Bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from her frozen height with jealous eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confronts the Dog and Hunter in the south,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is alone not dipt in Ocean’s stream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And straight he will come down to Ocean’s strand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ocean, whose watery ring enfolds the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on whose marge the ancient Fiants dwell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he will reach its unknown northern shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far, far beyond the outmost Fiant’s home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the chink’d fields of ice, the waste of snow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he will fare across the dismal ice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Northward, until he meets a stretching wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Barring his way, and in the wall a grate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then he must dismount, and on the ice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tighten the girths of Sleipner, Odin’s horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make him leap the grate, and come within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he will see stretch round him Hela’s realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plains of Niflheim, where dwell the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hear the roaring of the streams of Hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he will see the feeble shadowy tribes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Balder sitting crown’d, and Hela’s throne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then must he not regard the wailful ghosts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who all will flit, like eddying leaves, around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he must straight accost their solemn Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pay her homage, and entreat with prayers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Telling her all that grief they have in Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Balder, whom she holds by right below:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If haply he may melt her heart with words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make her yield, and give him Balder back.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She spoke; but Hoder answer’d her and said:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mother, a dreadful way is this thou show’st.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No journey for a sightless God to go.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And straight the mother of the Gods replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Therefore thyself thou shalt not go, my son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he whom first thou meetest when thou com’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Asgard, and declar’st this hidden way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall go, and I will be his guide unseen.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She spoke, and on her face let fall her veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bow’d her head, and sate with folded hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the central hearth those Women old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who while the Mother spake had ceased their toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began again to heap the sacred fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hoder turn’d, and left his mother’s house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fensaler, whose lit windows look to sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came again down to the roaring waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And back along the beach to Asgard went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pondering on that which Frea said should be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But Night came down, and darken’d Asgard streets.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then from their loathèd feast the Gods arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lighted torches, and took up the corpse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Balder from the floor of Odin’s hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laid it on a bier, and bare him home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the fast-darkening streets to his own house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breidablik, on whose columns Balder grav’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The enchantments, that recall the dead to life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wise he was, and many curious arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Postures of runes, and healing herbs he knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhappy: but that art he did not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep his own life safe, and see the sun:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There to his hall the Gods brought Balder home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each bespake him as he laid him down:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Would that ourselves, O Balder, we were borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home to our halls, with torchlight, by our kin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou might’st live, and still delight the Gods.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They spake: and each went home to his own house.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there was one, the first of all the Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For speed, and Hermod was his name in Heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most fleet he was, but now he went the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavy in heart for Balder, to his house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he in Asgard built him, there to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the harbour, by the city wall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him the blind Hoder met, as he came up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the sea cityward, and knew his step;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet could Hermod see his brother’s face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it grew dark; but Hoder touch’d his arm:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a spray of honeysuckle flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brushes across a tired traveller’s face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shuffles through the deep dew-moisten’d dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a May evening, in the darken’d lanes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And starts him, that he thinks a ghost went by⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Hoder brush’d by Hermod’s side, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Take Sleipner, Hermod, and set forth with dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Hela’s kingdom, to ask Balder back;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they shall be thy guides, who have the power.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake, and brush’d soft by, and disappear’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hermod gazed into the night, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Who is it utters through the dark his hest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So quickly, and will wait for no reply?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice was like the unhappy Hoder’s voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howbeit I will see, and do his hest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there rang note divine in that command.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So speaking, the fleet-footed Hermod came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home, and lay down to sleep in his own house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the Gods lay down in their own homes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hoder too came home, distraught with grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loathing to meet, at dawn, the other Gods:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he went in, and shut the door, and fixt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sword upright, and fell on it, and died.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But from the hill of Lidskialf Odin rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The throne, from which his eye surveys the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mounted Sleipner, and in darkness rode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Asgard. And the stars came out in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High over Asgard, to light home the King.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fiercely Odin gallop’d, mov’d in heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swift to Asgard, to the gate, he came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And terribly the hoofs of Sleipner rang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the flinty floor of Asgard streets;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Gods trembled on their golden beds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearing the wrathful Father coming home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dread, for like a whirlwind, Odin came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Valhalla’s gate he rode, and left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleipner; and Sleipner went to his own stall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in Valhalla Odin laid him down.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But in Breidablik Nanna, Balder’s wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came with the Goddesses who wrought her will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stood round Balder lying on his bier:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at his head and feet she station’d Scalds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in their lives were famous for their song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These o’er the corpse inton’d a plaintive strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dirge; and Nanna and her train replied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far into the night they wail’d their dirge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when their souls were satisfied with wail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They went, and laid them down, and Nanna went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into an upper chamber, and lay down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Frea seal’d her tired lids with sleep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And ’twas when Night is bordering hard on Dawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When air is chilliest, and the stars sunk low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Balder’s spirit through the gloom drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In garb, in form, in feature as he was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alive, and still the rays were round his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which were his glorious mark in Heaven; he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over against the curtain of the bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gaz’d on Nanna as she slept, and spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Poor lamb, thou sleepest, and forgett’st thy woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tears stand upon the lashes of thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tears wet the pillow by thy cheek; but thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a young child, hast cried thyself to sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep on: I watch thee, and am here to aid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alive I kept not far from thee, dear soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither do I neglect thee now, though dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with to-morrow’s dawn the Gods prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gather wood, and build a funeral pile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my ship, and burn my corpse with fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sad, sole honour of the dead; and thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They think to burn, and all my choicest wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With me, for thus ordains the common rite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it shall not be so: but mild, but swift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But painless shall a stroke from Frea come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cut thy thread of life, and free thy soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they shall burn thy corpse with mine, not thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well I know that by no stroke of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tardy or swift, would’st thou be loath to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So it restor’d thee, Nanna, to my side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom thou so well hast lov’d; but I can smooth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy way, and this at least my prayers avail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, and I fain would altogether ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death from thy head, and with the Gods in Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prolong thy life, though not by thee desir’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Right bars this, not only thy desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet dreary, Nanna, is the life they lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that dim world, in Hela’s mouldering realm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doleful are the ghosts, the troops of dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom Hela with austere control presides;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of the race of Gods is no one there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save me alone, and Hela, solemn Queen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the nobler souls of mortal men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On battle-field have met their death, and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feast in Valhalla, in my Father’s hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the inglorious sort are there below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old, the cowards, and the weak are there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men spent by sickness, or obscure decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But even there, O Nanna, we might find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some solace in each other’s look and speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandering together through that gloomy world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And talking of the life we led in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While we yet liv’d, among the other Gods.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake, and straight his lineaments began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fade: and Nanna in her sleep stretch’d out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her arms towards him with a cry; but he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mournfully shook his head, and disappear’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the woodman sees a little smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hang in the air, afield, and disappear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Balder faded in the night away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nanna on her bed sank back: but then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frea, the Mother of the Gods, with stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Painless and swift, set free her airy soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which took, on Balder’s track, the way below:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And instantly the sacred Morn appear’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="balder-dead-2">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Journey to the Dead</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Forth from the East, up the ascent of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Day drove his courser with the Shining Mane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in Valhalla, from his gable-perch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The golden-crested Cock began to crow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hereafter, in the blackest dead of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shrill and dismal cries that Bird shall crow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warning the Gods that foes draw nigh to Heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now he crew at dawn, a cheerful note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wake the Gods and Heroes to their tasks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the Gods, and all the Heroes, woke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from their beds the Heroes rose, and donn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their arms, and led their horses from the stall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mounted them, and in Valhalla’s court</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were rang’d; and then the daily fray began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all day long they there are hack’d and hewn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid dust, and groans, and limbs lopp’d off, and blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all at night return to Odin’s hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woundless and fresh: such lot is theirs in Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Valkyries on their steeds went forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward earth and fights of men; and at their side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Skulda, the youngest of the Nornies, rode:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over Bifrost, where is Heimdall’s watch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past Midgard Fortress, down to Earth they came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There through some battle-field, where men fall fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their horses fetlock-deep in blood, they ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pick the bravest warriors out for death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom they bring back with them at night to Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To glad the Gods, and feast in Odin’s hall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But the Gods went not now, as otherwhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the Tilt-Yard, where the Heroes fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feast their eyes with looking on the fray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did they to their Judgment-Place repair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the ash Igdrasil, in Ida’s plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they hold council, and give laws for men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they went, Odin first, the rest behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the hall Gladheim, which is built of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where are in circle rang’d twelve golden chairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the midst one higher, Odin’s throne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There all the Gods in silence sate them down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus the Father of the Ages spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Go quickly, Gods, bring wood to the seashore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all, which it beseems the dead to have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make a funeral pile on Balder’s ship.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the twelfth day the Gods shall burn his corpse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Hermod, thou, take Sleipner, and ride down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Hela’s kingdom, to ask Balder back.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So said he; and the Gods arose, and took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Axes and ropes, and at their head came Thor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouldering his hammer, which the Giants know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth wended they, and drave their steeds before:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up the dewy mountain tracks they far’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the dark forests, in the early dawn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up and down and side and slant they roam’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the glens all day an echo came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of crashing falls; for with his hammer Thor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smote ’mid the rocks the lichen-bearded pines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burst their roots, while to their tops the Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made fast the woven ropes, and hal’d them down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lopp’d their boughs, and clove them on the sward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bound the logs behind their steeds to draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drave them homeward; and the snorting steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went straining through the crackling brushwood down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the darkling forest paths the Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow’d, and on their shoulders carried boughs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they came out upon the plain, and pass’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asgard, and led their horses to the beach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loos’d them of their loads on the seashore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rang’d the wood in stacks by Balder’s ship;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every God went home to his own house.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But when the Gods were to the forest gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hermod led Sleipner from Valhalla forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saddled him; before that, Sleipner brook’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No meaner hand than Odin’s on his mane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On his broad back no lesser rider bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet docile now he stood at Hermod’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arching his neck, and glad to be bestrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing the God they went to seek, how dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Hermod mounted him, and sadly far’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silence, up the dark untravell’d road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which branches from the north of Heaven, and went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All day; and Daylight wan’d, and Night came on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that night he rode, and journey’d so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine days, nine nights, toward the northern ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through valleys deep-engulph’d, by roaring streams:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the tenth morn he beheld the bridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which spans with golden arches Giall’s stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the bridge a Damsel watching arm’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the strait passage, at the further end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the road issues between walling rocks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scant space that Warder left for passers by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as when cowherds in October drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their kine across a snowy mountain-pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To winter pasture on the southern side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the ridge a wagon chokes the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wedg’d in the snow; then painfully the hinds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With goad and shouting urge their cattle past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plunging through deep untrodden banks of snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To right and left, and warm steam fills the air⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So on the bridge that Damsel block’d the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And question’d Hermod as he came, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Who art thou on thy black and fiery horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under whose hoofs the bridge o’er Giall’s stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rumbles and shakes? Tell me thy race and home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yestermorn five troops of dead pass’d by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bound on their way below to Hela’s realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shook the bridge so much as thou alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou hast flesh and colour on thy cheeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like men who live and draw the vital air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor look’st thou pale and wan, like men deceas’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Souls bound below, my daily passers here.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And the fleet-footed Hermod answer’d her:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O damsel, Hermod am I call’d, the son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Odin; and my high-roof’d house is built</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far hence, in Asgard, in the City of Gods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Sleipner, Odin’s horse, is this I ride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I come, sent this road on Balder’s track:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say then, if he hath cross’d thy bridge or no?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake; the Warder of the bridge replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Hermod, rarely do the feet of Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or of the horses of the Gods resound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my bridge; and, when they cross, I know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balder hath gone this way, and ta’en the road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Below there, to the north, tow’rd Hela’s realm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From here the cold white mist can be discern’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor lit with sun, but through the darksome air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the dim vapour-blotted light of stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hangs over the ice where lies the road.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in that ice are lost those northern streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freezing and ridging in their onward flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from the fountain of Vergelmer run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spring that bubbles up by Hela’s throne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are the joyless seats, the haunt of ghosts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hela’s pale swarms; and there was Balder bound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ride on; pass free: but he by this is there.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She spake, and stepp’d aside, and left him room.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hermod greeted her, and gallop’d by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the bridge; then she took post again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But northward Hermod rode, the way below:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er a darksome tract, which knows no sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by the blotted light of stars, he far’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he came down to Ocean’s northern strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the drear ice, beyond the Giants’ home:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence on he journey’d o’er the fields of ice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still north, until he met a stretching wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Barring his way, and in the wall a grate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he dismounted, and drew tight the girths,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the smooth ice, of Sleipner, Odin’s horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made him leap the grate, and came within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he beheld spread round him Hela’s realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plains of Niflheim, where dwell the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard the thunder of the streams of Hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For near the wall the river of Roaring flows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outmost: the others near the centre run⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Storm, the Abyss, the Howling, and the Pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These flow by Hela’s throne, and near their spring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the dark flock’d up the shadowy tribes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the swallows crowd the bulrush-beds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some clear river, issuing from a lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On autumn days, before they cross the sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to each bulrush-crest a swallow hangs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swinging, and others skim the river streams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their quick twittering fills the banks and shores⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So around Hermod swarm’d the twittering ghosts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women, and infants, and young men who died</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too soon for fame, with white ungraven shields;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And old men, known to Glory, but their star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betray’d them, and of wasting age they died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not wounds: yet, dying, they their armour wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now have chief regard in Hela’s realm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind flock’d wrangling up a piteous crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greeted of none, disfeatur’d and forlorn⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cowards, who were in sloughs interr’d alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round them still the wattled hurdles hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith they stamp’d them down, and trod them deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hide their shameful memory from men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all he pass’d unhail’d, and reach’d the throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hela, and saw, near it, Balder crown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hela set thereon, with countenance stern;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus bespake him first the solemn Queen:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Unhappy, how hast thou endur’d to leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light, and journey to the cheerless land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where idly flit about the feeble shades?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How didst thou cross the bridge o’er Giall’s stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being alive, and come to Ocean’s shore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or how o’erleap the grate that bars the wall?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She spake: but down off Sleipner Hermod sprang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell before her feet, and clasp’d her knees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spake, and mild entreated her, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“O Hela, wherefore should the Gods declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their errands to each other, or the ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They go? the errand and the way is known.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou know’st, thou know’st, what grief we have in Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Balder, whom thou hold’st by right below:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restore him, for what part fulfils he here?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall he shed cheer over the cheerless seats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And touch the apathetic ghosts with joy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for such end, O Queen, thou hold’st thy realm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Heaven was Balder born, the City of Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Heroes, where they live in light and joy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither restore him, for his place is there.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spoke; and grave replied the solemn Queen:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hermod, for he thou art, thou Son of Heaven!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A strange unlikely errand, sure, is thine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do the Gods send to me to make them blest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small bliss my race hath of the Gods obtain’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three mighty children to my Father Lok</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did Angerbode, the Giantess, bring forth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fenris the Wolf, the Serpent huge, and Me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these the Serpent in the sea ye cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who since in your despite hath wax’d amain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now with gleaming ring enfolds the world:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me on this cheerless nether world ye threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave me nine unlighted realms to rule:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While on his island in the lake, afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made fast to the bor’d crag, by wile not strength</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subdu’d, with limber chains lives Fenris bound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lok still subsists in Heaven, our Father wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your mate, though loath’d, and feasts in Odin’s hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But him too foes await, and netted snares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a cave a bed of needle rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er his visage serpents dropping gall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he shall one day rise, and burst his bonds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with himself set us his offspring free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he guides Muspel’s children to their bourne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till then in peril or in pain we live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrought by the Gods: and ask the Gods our aid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howbeit we abide our day: till then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We do not as some feebler haters do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek to afflict our foes with petty pangs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Helpless to better us, or ruin them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come then; if Balder was so dear belov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this is true, and such a loss is Heaven’s⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear, how to Heaven may Balder be restor’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show me through all the world the signs of grief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fails but one thing to grieve, here Balder stops:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let all that lives and moves upon the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weep him, and all that is without life weep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let Gods, men, brutes, beweep him; plants and stones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall I know the lost was dear indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bend my heart, and give him back to Heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She spake; and Hermod answer’d her, and said:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hela, such as thou say’st, the terms shall be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But come, declare me this, and truly tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May I, ere I depart, bid Balder hail?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or is it here withheld to greet the dead?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake, and straightway Hela answered him:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hermod, greet Balder if thou wilt, and hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Converse: his speech remains, though he be dead.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And straight to Balder Hermod turn’d, and spake:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Even in the abode of death, O Balder, hail!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hear’st, if hearing, like as speech, is thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The terms of thy releasement hence to Heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fear nothing but that all shall be fulfill’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For not unmindful of thee are the Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who see the light, and blest in Asgard dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even here they seek thee out, in Hela’s realm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sure of all the happiest far art thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who ever have been known in Earth or Heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alive, thou wert of Gods the most belov’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now thou sittest crown’d by Hela’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, and hast honour among all the dead.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake; and Balder utter’d him reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But feebly, as a voice far off; he said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Hermod the nimble, gild me not my death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better to live a slave, a captur’d man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who scatters rushes in a master’s hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than be a crown’d king here, and rule the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now I count not of these terms as safe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be fulfill’d, nor my return as sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I be lov’d, and many mourn my death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For double-minded ever was the seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Lok, and double are the gifts they give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howbeit, report thy message; and therewith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Odin, to my Father, take this ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Memorial of me, whether sav’d or no;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tell the Heaven-born Gods how thou hast seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me sitting here below by Hela’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crown’d, having honour among all the dead.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake, and raised his hand, and gave the ring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with inscrutable regard the Queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hell beheld them, and the ghosts stood dumb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Hermod took the ring, and yet once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kneel’d and did homage to the solemn Queen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then mounted Sleipner, and set forth to ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back, through the astonish’d tribes of dead, to Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the wall he came, and found the grate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifted, and issued on the fields of ice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er the ice he fared to Ocean’s strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up from thence, a wet and misty road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the arm’d Damsel’s bridge, and Giall’s stream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worse was that way to go than to return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him: for others all return is barr’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine days he took to go, two to return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the twelfth morn saw the light of Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a traveller in the early dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the steep edge of some great valley comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which a river flows, and sees beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clouds of white rolling vapours fill the vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But o’er them, on the farther slope, descries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vineyards, and crofts, and pastures, bright with sun⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Hermod, o’er the fog between, saw Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Sleipner snorted, for he smelt the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Heaven: and mightily, as wing’d, he flew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hermod saw the towers of Asgard rise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he drew near, and heard no living voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Asgard; and the golden halls were dumb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Hermod knew what labour held the Gods:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the empty streets he rode, and pass’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the gate-house to the sands, and found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Gods on the sea shore by Balder’s ship.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="balder-dead-3">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Funeral</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The Gods held talk together, group’d in knots,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round Balder’s corpse, which they had thither borne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hermod came down towards them from the gate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Lok, the Father of the Serpent, first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld him come, and to his neighbour spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“See, here is Hermod, who comes single back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Hell; and shall I tell thee how he seems?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like as a farmer, who hath lost his dog,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some morn, at market, in a crowded town⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through many streets the poor beast runs in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And follows this man after that, for hours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, late at evening, spent and panting, falls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before a stranger’s threshold, not his home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flanks a-tremble, and his slender tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hangs quivering out between his dust-smear’d jaws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And piteously he eyes the passers by:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But home his master comes to his own farm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in the country, wondering where he is⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Hermod comes to-day unfollow’d home.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">And straight his neighbour, mov’d with wrath, replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Deceiver, fair in form, but false in heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enemy, Mocker, whom, though Gods, we hate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peace, lest our Father Odin hear thee gibe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would I might see him snatch thee in his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bind thy carcase, like a bale, with cords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hurl thee in a lake, to sink or swim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If clear from plotting Balder’s death, to swim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But deep, if thou devisedst it, to drown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And perish, against fate, before thy day!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So they two soft to one another spake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Odin look’d toward the land, and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His messenger; and he stood forth, and cried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hermod came, and leapt from Sleipner down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his father’s hand put Sleipner’s rein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greeted Odin and the Gods, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Odin, my father, and ye, Gods of Heaven!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, home, having perform’d your will, I come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the joyless kingdom have I been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Below, and look’d upon the shadowy tribes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ghosts, and communed with their solemn Queen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to your prayer she sends you this reply:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Show her through all the world the signs of grief:</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Fails but one thing to grieve, there Balder stops.</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Let Gods, men, brutes, beweep him, plants and stones.</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>So shall she know your loss was dear indeed,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>And bend her heart, and give you Balder back.</em>”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spoke; and all the Gods to Odin look’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And straight the Father of the Ages said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ye Gods, these terms may keep another day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now, put on your arms, and mount your steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in procession all come near, and weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balder; for that is what the dead desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When ye enough have wept, then build a pile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the heap’d wood, and burn his corpse with fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of our sight; that we may turn from grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lead, as erst, our daily life in Heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spoke; and the Gods arm’d: and Odin donn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His dazzling corslet and his helm of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led the way on Sleipner: and the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow’d, in tears, their Father and their King.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrice in arms around the dead they rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping; the sands were wetted, and their arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their thick-falling tears: so good a friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They mourn’d that day, so bright, so lov’d a God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Odin came, and laid his kingly hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Balder’s breast, and thus began the wail:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Farewell, O Balder, bright and lov’d, my Son!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that great day, the Twilight of the Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Muspel’s children shall beleaguer Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then we shall miss thy counsel and thy arm.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thou camest near the next, O Warrior Thor!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouldering thy Hammer, in thy chariot drawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swaying the long-hair’d Goats with silver’d rein;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over Balder’s corpse these words didst say:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Brother, thou dwellest in the darksome land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And talkest with the feeble tribes of ghosts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, and I know not how they prize thee there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here, I know, thou wilt be miss’d and mourn’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For haughty spirits and high wraths are rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Gods and Heroes here in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As among those whose joy and work is war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And daily strifes arise, and angry words:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from thy lips, O Balder, night or day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard no one ever an injurious word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To God or Hero, but thou keptest back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The others, labouring to compose their brawls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be ye then kind, as Balder too was kind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For we lose him, who smooth’d all strife in Heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake: and all the Gods assenting wail’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Freya next came nigh, with golden tears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loveliest Goddess she in Heaven, by all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most honour’d after Frea, Odin’s wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her long ago the wandering Oder took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mate, but left her to roam distant lands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since then she seeks him, and weeps tears of gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Names hath she many; Vanadis on earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They call her; Freya is her name in Heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She in her hands took Balder’s head, and spake:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Balder, my brother, thou art gone a road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unknown and long, and haply on that way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My long-lost wandering Oder thou hast met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in the paths of Heaven he is not found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, if it be so, tell him what thou wert</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his neglected wife, and what he is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wring his heart with shame, to hear thy word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he, my husband, left me here to pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long a wife, when his unquiet heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First drove him from me into distant lands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since then I vainly seek him through the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weep from shore to shore my golden tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But neither god nor mortal heeds my pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou only, Balder, wert for ever kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take my hand, and wipe my tears, and say:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Weep not, O Freya, weep no golden tears!</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>One day the wandering Oder will return,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Or thou wilt find him in thy faithful search</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>On some great road, or resting in an inn,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Or at a ford, or sleeping by a tree.</em>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Balder said; but Oder, well I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My truant Oder I shall see no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the world’s end; and Balder now is gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I am left uncomforted in Heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She spake; and all the Goddesses bewail’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Last, from among the Heroes one came near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No God, but of the Hero-troop the chief⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regner, who swept the northern sea with fleets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rul’d o’er Denmark and the heathy isles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Living; but Ella captur’d him and slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A king, whose fame then fill’d the vast of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now time obscures it, and men’s later deeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He last approach’d the corpse, and spake, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Balder, there yet are many Scalds in Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still left, and that chief Scald, thy brother Brage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom we may bid to sing, though thou art gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all these gladly, while we drink, we hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the feast is done, in Odin’s hall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they harp ever on one string, and wake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remembrance in our soul of wars alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as on earth we valiantly have wag’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blood, and ringing blows, and violent death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when thou sangest, Balder, thou didst strike</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another note, and, like a bird in spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy voice of joyance minded us, and youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wife, and children, and our ancient home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, and I too remember’d then no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dungeon, where the serpents stung me dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Ella’s victory on the English coast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I heard Thora laugh in Gothland Isle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw my shepherdess, Aslauga, tend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her flock along the white Norwegian beach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tears started to mine eyes with yearning joy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore with grateful heart I mourn thee dead.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So Regner spake, and all the Heroes groan’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now the sun had pass’d the height of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon had all that day been spent in wail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then the Father of the Ages said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ye Gods, there well may be too much of wail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring now the gather’d wood to Balder’s ship;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heap on the deck the logs, and build the pyre.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But when the Gods and Heroes heard, they brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wood to Balder’s ship, and built a pile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full the deck’s breadth, and lofty; then the corpse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Balder on the highest top they laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Nanna on his right, and on his left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hoder, his brother, whom his own hand slew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they set jars of wine and oil to lean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the bodies, and stuck torches near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Splinters of pine-wood, soak’d with turpentine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought his arms and gold, and all his stuff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slew the dogs who at his table fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his horse, Balder’s horse, whom most he lov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threw them on the pyre, and Odin threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A last choice gift thereon, his golden ring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fixt the mast, and hoisted up the sails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they put fire to the wood; and Thor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set his stout shoulder hard against the stern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To push the ship through the thick sand: sparks flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the deep trench she plough’d⁠—so strong a God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Furrow’d it⁠—and the water gurgled in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Ship floated on the waves, and rock’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the hills a strong East-Wind arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came down moaning to the sea; first squalls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran black o’er the sea’s face, then steady rush’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breeze, and fill’d the sails, and blew the fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, wreath’d in smoke, the Ship stood out to sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon with a roaring rose the mighty fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the pile crackled; and between the logs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sharp quivering tongues of flame shot out, and leapt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curling and darting, higher, until they lick’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The summit of the pile, the dead, the mast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ate the shrivelling sails; but still the Ship</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drove on, ablaze, above her hull with fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Gods stood upon the beach, and gaz’dL</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, while they gaz’d, the Sun went lurid down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the smoke-wrapt sea, and Night came on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the wind fell, with night, and there was calm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But through the dark they watch’d the burning Ship</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still carried o’er the distant waters on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farther and farther, like an Eye of Fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as in the dark night a travelling man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who bivouacs in a forest ’mid the hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sees suddenly a spire of flame shoot up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the black waste forest, far below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which woodcutters have lighted near their lodge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the wolves; and all night long it flares:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So flar’d, in the far darkness, blazed Balder’s pile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fainter, as the stars rose high, it burn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bodies were consum’d, ash chok’d the pile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as in a decaying winter fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A charr’d log, falling, makes a shower of sparks⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, with a shower of sparks, the pile fell in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reddening the sea around; and all was dark.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But the Gods went by starlight up the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Asgard, and sate down in Odin’s hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At table, and the funeral-feast began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night they ate the boar Serimner’s flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from their horns, with silver rimm’d, drank mead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent, and waited for the sacred Morn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And Morning over all the world was spread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then from their loathèd feast the Gods arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took their horses, and set forth to ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the bridge Bifrost, where is Heimdall’s watch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the ash Igdrasil, and Ida’s plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thor came on foot; the rest on horseback rode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they found Mimir sitting by his Fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Wisdom, which beneath the ashtree springs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw the Nornies watering the roots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that world-shadowing tree with Honey-dew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came the Gods, and sate them down on stones:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus the Father of the Ages said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ye Gods, the terms ye know, which Hermod brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accept them or reject them; both have grounds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accept them, and they bind us, unfulfill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave for ever Balder in the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unrecover’d prisoner, shade with shades.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But how, ye say, should the fulfilment fail?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smooth sound the terms, and light to be fulfill’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dear-belov’d was Balder while he liv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heaven and Earth, and who would grudge him tears?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from the traitorous seed of Lok they come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These terms, and I suspect some hidden fraud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bethink ye, Gods, is there no other way?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak, were not this a way, the way for Gods?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I, if Odin, clad in radiant arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mounted on Sleipner, with the Warrior Thor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawn in his car beside me, and my sons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the strong brood of Heaven, to swell my train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should make irruption into Hela’s realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set the fields of gloom ablaze with light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring in triumph Balder back to Heaven?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake, and his fierce sons applauded loud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Frea, Mother of the Gods, arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daughter and wife of Odin; thus she said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Odin, thou Whirlwind, what a threat is this!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou threatenest what transcends thy might, even thine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of all powers the mightiest far art thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord over men on Earth, and Gods in Heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet even from thee thyself hath been withheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One thing; to undo what thou thyself hast rul’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all which hath been fixt, was fixt by thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the beginning, ere the Gods were born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the Heavens were builded, thou didst slay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Giant Ymir, whom the Abyss brought forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou and thy brethren fierce, the Sons of Bor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threw his trunk to choke the abysmal void:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of his flesh and members thou didst build</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Earth and Ocean, and above them Heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the flaming world, where Muspel reigns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou sent’st and fetched’st fire, and madest lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sun, Moon, and Stars, which thou hast hung in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dividing clear the paths of night and day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Asgard thou didst build, and Midgard Fort:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then me thou mad’st; of us the Gods were born:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Last, walking by the sea, thou foundest spars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wood, and framed’st men, who till the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or on the sea, the field of pirates, sail:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the race of Ymir thou didst drown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one, Bergelmer; he on shipboard fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy deluge, and from him the Giants sprang;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all that brood thou hast remov’d far off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set by Ocean’s utmost marge to dwell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Hela into Niflheim thou threw’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gav’st her nine unlighted worlds to rule,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Queen, and empire over all the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That empire wilt thou now invade, light up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her darkness, from her grasp a subject tear?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Try it; but I, for one, will not applaud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor do I merit, Odin, thou should’st slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me and my words, though thou be first in Heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I too am a Goddess, born of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eldest, and of me the Gods are sprung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that is to come I know, but lock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In my own breast, and have to none reveal’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come then; since Hela holds by right her prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But offers terms for his release to Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accept the chance;⁠—thou canst no more obtain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Send through the world thy messengers: entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All living and unliving things to weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Balder; if thou haply thus may’st melt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hela, and win the lov’d one back to Heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She spake, and on her face let fall her veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bow’d her head, and sate with folded hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did the all-ruling Odin slight her word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straightway he spake, and thus address’d the Gods:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Go quickly forth through all the world, and pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All living and unliving things to weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balder, if haply he may thus be won.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">When the Gods heard, they straight arose, and took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their horses, and rode forth through all the world.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>North, south, east, west they struck, and roam’d the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entreating all things to weep Balder’s death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that liv’d, and all without life, wept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as in winter, when the frost breaks up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At winter’s end, before the spring begins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a warm west wind blows, and thaw sets in⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After an hour a dripping sound is heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the forests, and the soft-strewn snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the trees is dibbled thick with holes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the boughs the snowloads shuffle down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in fields sloping to the south dark plots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grass peep out amid surrounding snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And widen, and the peasant’s heart is glad⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So through the world was heard a dripping noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all things weeping to bring Balder back:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there fell joy upon the Gods to hear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But Hermod rode with Niord, whom he took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To show him spits and beaches of the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off, where some unwarn’d might fail to weep⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Niord, the God of storms, whom fishers know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not born in Heaven; he was in Vanheim rear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With men, but lives a hostage with the Gods:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knows each frith, and every rocky creek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fring’d with dark pines, and sands where seafowl scream:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They two scour’d every coast, and all things wept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they rode home together, through the wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jarnvid, which to east of Midgard lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bordering the Giants, where the trees are iron;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There in the wood before a cave they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sate, in the cave’s mouth, a skinny Hag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toothless and old; she gibes the passers by:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thok is she call’d, but now Lok wore her shape:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She greeted them the first, and laugh’d, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ye Gods, good lack, is it so dull in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye come pleasuring to Thok’s Iron Wood?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lovers of change ye are, fastidious sprites.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look, as in some boor’s yard a sweet-breath’d cow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose manger is stuff’d full of good fresh hay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snuffs at it daintily, and stoops her head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To chew the straw, her litter, at her feet⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So ye grow squeamish, Gods, and sniff at Heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She spake; but Hermod answer’d her and said:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thok, not for gibes we come, we come for tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balder is dead, and Hela holds her prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But will restore, if all things give him tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begrudge not thine; to all was Balder dear.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But, with a louder laugh, the Hag replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Is Balder dead? and do ye come for tears?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thok with dry eyes will weep o’er Balder’s pyre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weep him all other things, if weep they will⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I weep him not: let Hela keep her prey.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She spake, and to the cavern’s depth she fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mocking: and Hermod knew their toil was vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as seafaring men, who long have wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the great deep for gain, at last come home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And towards evening see the headlands rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their own country, and can clear descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fire of wither’d furze which boys have lit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the cliffs, or smoke of burning weeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of a till’d field inland;⁠—then the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Catches them, and drives out again to sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they go long days tossing up and down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the grey sea-ridges; and the glimpse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of port they had makes bitterer far their toil⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the Gods’ cross was bitterer for their joy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then, sad at heart, to Niord Hermod spake:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“It is the Accuser Lok, who flouts us all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ride back, and tell in Heaven this heavy news.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must again below, to Hela’s realm.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spoke; and Niord set forth back to Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But northward Hermod rode, the way below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The way he knew: and travers’d Giall’s stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down to Ocean grop’d, and cross’d the ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came beneath the wall, and found the grate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still lifted; well was his return foreknown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once more Hermod saw around him spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The joyless plains, and heard the streams of Hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as he enter’d, on the extremest bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Niflheim, he saw one Ghost come near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hovering, and stopping oft, as if afraid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hoder, the unhappy, whom his own hand slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hermod look’d, and knew his brother’s ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call’d him by his name, and sternly said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Hoder, ill-fated, blind in heart and eyes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why tarriest thou to plunge thee in the gulph</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the deep inner gloom, but flittest here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In twilight, on the lonely verge of Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the other ghosts, and Hela’s throne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubtless thou fearest to meet Balder’s voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy brother, whom through folly thou didst slay.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spoke; but Hoder answer’d him, and said:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hermod the nimble, dost thou still pursue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unhappy with reproach, even in the grave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this I died, and fled beneath the gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not daily to endure abhorring Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor with a hateful presence cumber Heaven⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And canst thou not, even here, pass pitying by?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No less than Balder have I lost the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Heaven, and communion with my kin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I too had once a wife, and once a child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And substance, and a golden house in Heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all I left of my own act, and fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Below, and dost thou hate me even here?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balder upbraids me not, nor hates at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he has cause, have any cause; but he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that with downcast looks I hither came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretch’d forth his hand, and with benignant voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Welcome</em>, he said, <em>if there be welcome here</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Brother and fellow-sport of Lok with me</em>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not to offend thee, Hermod, nor to force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My hated converse on thee, came I up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the deep gloom, where I will now return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But earnestly I long’d to hover near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not too far off, when that thou camest by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel the presence of a brother God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hear the passage of a horse of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the last time: for here thou com’st no more.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake, and turn’d to go to the inner gloom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Hermod stay’d him with mild words, and said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Thou doest well to chide me, Hoder blind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly thou say’st, the planning guilty mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Lok’s; the unwitting hand alone was thine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Gods are like the sons of men in this⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they have woe, they blame the nearest cause.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howbeit stay, and be appeas’d; and tell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sits Balder still in pomp by Hela’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or is he mingled with the unnumber’d dead?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And the blind Hoder answer’d him and spake:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“His place of state remains by Hela’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But empty: for his wife, for Nanna came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lately below, and join’d him; and the Pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frequent the still recesses of the realm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hela, and hold converse undisturb’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they too doubtless, will have breath’d the balm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which floats before a visitant from Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have drawn upwards to this verge of Hell.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake; and, as he ceas’d, a puff of wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roll’d heavily the leaden mist aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round where they stood, and they beheld Two Forms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make toward them o’er the stretching cloudy plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hermod straight perceiv’d them, who they were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balder and Nanna; and to Balder said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Balder, too truly thou foresaw’st a snare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lok triumphs still, and Hela keeps her prey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more to Asgard shalt thou come, nor lodge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy own house, Breidablik, nor enjoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love all bear towards thee, nor train up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forset, thy son, to be belov’d like thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here must thou lie, and wait an endless age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore for the last time, O Balder, hail!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake; and Balder answer’d him and said:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hail and farewell, for here thou com’st no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet mourn not for me, Hermod, when thou sitt’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heaven, nor let the other Gods lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As wholly to be pitied, quite forlorn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Nanna hath rejoin’d me, who, of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heaven, was seldom parted from my side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still the acceptance follows me, which crown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My former life, and cheers me even here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The iron frown of Hela is relax’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I draw nigh, and the wan tribes of dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love me, and gladly bring for my award</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ineffectual feuds and feeble hates⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shadows of hates, but they distress them still.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And the fleet-footed Hermod made reply:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou hast then all the solace death allows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Esteem and function: and so far is well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet here thou liest, Balder, underground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rusting for ever: and the years roll on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The generations pass, the ages grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring us nearer to the final day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from the south shall march the Fiery Band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cross the bridge of Heaven, with Lok for guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Fenris at his heel with broken chain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While from the east the Giant Rymer steers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ship, and the great Serpent makes to land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all are marshall’d in one flaming square</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the Gods, upon the plains of Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mourn thee, that thou canst not help us then.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake; but Balder answer’d him and said:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mourn not for me: Mourn, Hermod, for the Gods:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mourn for the men on Earth, the Gods in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who live, and with their eyes shall see that day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day will come, when Asgard’s towers shall fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Odin, and his Sons, the seed of Heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what were I, to save them in that hour?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If strength could save them, could not Odin save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Father, and his pride, the Warrior Thor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vidar the Silent, the Impetuous Tyr?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, what were I, when these can naught avail?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, doubtless, when the day of battle comes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the two Hosts are marshall’d, and in Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The golden-crested Cock shall sound alarm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his black Brother-Bird from hence reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bucklers clash, and spears begin to pour⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Longing will stir within my breast, though vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not to me so grievous, as, I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To other Gods it were, is my enforc’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Absence from fields where I could nothing aid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I am long since weary of your storm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of carnage, and find, Hermod, in your life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something too much of war and broils, which make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life one perpetual fight, a bath of blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes are dizzy with the arrowy hail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine ears are stunn’d with blows, and sick for calm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inactive therefore let me lie, in gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unarm’d, inglorious: I attend the course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ages, and my late return to light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In times less alien to a spirit mild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In new-recover’d seats, the happier day.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake; and the fleet Hermod thus replied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Brother, what seats are these, what happier day?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me, that I may ponder it when gone.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And the ray-crowned Balder answer’d him:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Far to the south, beyond The Blue, there spreads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another Heaven, The Boundless: no one yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath reach’d it: there hereafter shall arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second Asgard, with another name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither, when o’er this present Earth and Heavens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tempest of the latter days hath swept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they from sight have disappear’d, and sunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall a small remnant of the Gods repair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hoder and I shall join them from the grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There re-assembling we shall see emerge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the bright Ocean at our feet an Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More fresh, more verdant than the last, with fruits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Self-springing, and a seed of man preserv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who then shall live in peace, as now in war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we in Heaven shall find again with joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ruin’d palaces of Odin, seats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Familiar, halls where we have supp’d of old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Re-enter them with wonder, never fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our eyes with gazing, and rebuild with tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we shall tread once more the well-known plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ida, and among the grass shall find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The golden dice wherewith we play’d of yore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that will bring to mind the former life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pastime of the Gods, the wise discourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Odin, the delights of other days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Hermod, pray that thou may’st join us then!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such for the future is my hope: meanwhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rest the thrall of Hela, and endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death, and the gloom which round me even now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thickens, and to its inner gulph recalls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell, for longer speech is not allow’d.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spoke, and wav’d farewell, and gave his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Nanna; and she gave their brother blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hand, in turn, for guidance; and The Three</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Departed o’er the cloudy plain, and soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faded from sight into the interior gloom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Hermod stood beside his drooping horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mute, gazing after them in tears: and fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fain had he follow’d their receding steps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though they to Death were bound, and he to Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then; but a Power he could not break withheld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a stork which idle boys have trapp’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tied him in a yard, at autumn sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flocks of his kind pass flying o’er his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To warmer lands, and coasts that keep the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He strains to join their flight, and from his shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follows them with a long complaining cry⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Hermod gazed, and yearn’d to join his kin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">At last he sigh’d, and set forth back to Heaven.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="haworth-churchyard" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Haworth Churchyard</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">April, 1855</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Where, under Loughrigg, the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Rotha sparkles, the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are green, in the house of one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friendly and gentle, now dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wordsworth’s son-in-law, friend⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four years since, on a mark’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evening, a meeting I saw.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Two friends met there, two fam’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gifted women.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> The one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brilliant with recent renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young, unpractis’d, had told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a Master’s accent her feign’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Story of passionate life:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other, maturer in fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earning, she too, her praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First in Fiction, had since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Widen’d her sweep, and survey’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>History, Politics, Mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The two held converse: they wrote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a book which of glorious souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held memorial: Bard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warrior, Statesman, had left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their names:⁠—chief treasure of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scott had bestow’d there his last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathings of song, with a pen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tottering, a death-stricken hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I beheld; the obscure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the famous. Alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Years in number, it seem’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay before both, and a fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heighten’d, and multiplied power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold! The elder, to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies expecting from Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mortal weakness, a last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summons: the younger is dead!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">First to the living we pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mournful homage: the Muse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gains not an earth-deafen’d ear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Hail to the steadfast soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, unflinching and keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought to erase from its depth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mist, and illusion, and fear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail to the spirit which dar’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trust its own thoughts, before yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echoed her back by the crowd!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail to the courage which gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Voice to its creed, ere the creed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won consecration from Time!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Turn, O Death, on the vile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn on the foolish the stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hanging now o’er a head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Active, beneficent, pure!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if the prayer be in vain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if the stroke <em>must</em> fall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her, whom we cannot save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What might we say to console?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">She will not see her country lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its greatness, nor the reign of fools prolong’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will behold no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This ignominious spectacle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Power dropping from the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of paralytic factions, and no soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To snatch and wield it: will not see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fellow people sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helplessly gazing on their own decline.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Myrtle and rose fit the young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laurel and oak the mature.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Private affections, for these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have run their circle, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Space for things far from themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thoughts of the general weal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Country, and public cares:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Public cares, which move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seldom and faitly the depth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of younger passionate souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plung’d in themselves, who demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only to live by the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only to love and be lov’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">How shall we honour the young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ardent, the gifted? how mourn?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Console we cannot; her ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is deaf. Far northward from here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a churchyard high mid the moors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Yorkshire, a little earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stops it for ever to praise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Where, behind Keighley, the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the heart of the moors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between heath-clad showery hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs, and colliers’ carts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poach the deep ways coming down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a rough, grimed race have their homes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There on its slope is built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moorland town. But the church</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands on the crest of the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lonely and bleak; at its side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parsonage-house and the graves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">See! in the desolate house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The childless father! Alas⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Age, whom the most of us chide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chide, and put back, and delay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, unupbraided for once!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay thy benumbing hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gratefully cold, on this brow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut out the grief, the despair!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaken the sense of his loss!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deaden the infinite pain!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Another grief I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Younger: but this the Muse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pity and silent awe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revering what she cannot soothe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whith veil’ face and bow’d head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salutes, and passes by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Strew with roses the grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the early-dying. Alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Early she goes on the path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Silent Country, and leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half her laurels unwon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dying too soon: yet green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laurels she had, and a course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short, but redoubled by Fame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For him who must live many years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That life is best which slips away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the light, and mutely; which avoids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fame, and her less-fair followers, Envy, Strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stupid Detraction, Jealousy, Cabal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insincere Prasies:⁠—which descends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mossy quiet track to Age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But, when immature Death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beckons too early the guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the half-tried Banquet of Life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young, in the bloom of his days;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaves no leisure to press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow and surely, the sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a tranquil life in the shade⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fuller for him be the hours!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give him emothion, through pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him life, let him feel, <em>I have liv’d</em>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heap up his moments with life!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quicken his pulses with Fame!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And not friendless, nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only with strangers to meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faces ungreeting and cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, O Mourn’d One, to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enterest the House of the Grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those of thy blood, whom thou lov’dst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have preceded thee; young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loving, a sisterly band:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some in gift, some in art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inferior; all in fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, like friends, shall receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This comer, greet her with joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome the Sister, the Friend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear with delight of thy fame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Round thee they lie; the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows from their graves toward thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She, whose genius, though not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Puissant like thine, was yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet and graceful: and She<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(How shall I sing her?)⁠—whose soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew no fellow for might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passion, vehemence, grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daring, since Byron died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That world-fam’d Son of Fire; She,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a> who sank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baffled, unknown, self-consum’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose too bold dying song<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook, like a clarion-blast, my soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Of one too I have heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Brother⁠—sleeps he here?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all his gifted race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the least gifted; young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy, beautiful; the cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many hopes, of many tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Boy, if here thou sleep’st, sleep well!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thee too did the Muse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright in thy cradle smile:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But some dark Shadow came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(I know not what) and interpos’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Sleep, O cluster of friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep! or only, when May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought by the West Wind, returns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to your native heaths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the plover is heard on the moors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yearly awake, to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The opening summer, the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining moorland; to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The drowsy bee, as of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hum o’er the thyme, the grouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call from the heather in bloom.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Sleep: or only for this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Break your united repose.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="early-death-and-fame" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Early Death and Fame</h2>
			<p>
				<span>For him who must see many years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I praise the life which slips away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the light and mutely; which avoids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fame, and her less fair followers, envy, strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stupid detraction, jealousy, cabal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insincere praises; which descends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quiet mossy track to age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, when immature death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beckons too early the guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the half-tried banquet of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young, in the bloom of his days;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaves no leisure to press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow and surely, the sweets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a tranquil life in the shade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fuller for him be the hours!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give him emotion, though pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him live, let him feel: <em>I have lived!</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heap up his moments with life!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Triple his pulses with fame!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="merope" epub:type="z3998:drama">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Merope</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Tragedy</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="merope-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Historical Introduction</h3>
				<p>Apollodorus says:⁠—“Cresphontes had not reigned long in Messenia when he was murdered, together with two of his sons. And Polyphontes reigned in his stead, he, too, being of the family of Hercules; and he had for his wife, against her will, Merope, the widow of the murdered king. But Merope had borne to Cresphontes a third son, called Aepytus; him she gave to her own father to bring up. He, when he came to man’s estate, returned secretly to Messenia, and slew Polyphontes and the other murderers of his father.”</p>
				<p>Hyginus says:⁠—“Merope sent away and concealed her infant son. Polyphontes sought for him everywhere in vain. He, when he grew up, laid a plan to avenge the murder of his father and brothers. In pursuance of this plan he came to king Polyphontes and reported the death of the son of Cresphontes and Merope. The king ordered him to be hospitably entertained, intending to inquire further of him. He, being very tired, went to sleep, and an old man, who was the channel through whom the mother and son used to communicate, arrived at this moment in tears, bringing word to Merope that her son had disappeared from his protector’s house, and was slain. Merope, believing that the sleeping stranger was the murderer of her son, came into the guest-chamber with an axe, not knowing that he whom she would slay was her son; the old man recognized him, and withheld Merope from slaying him. The king, Polyphontes, rejoicing at the supposed death of Aepytus, celebrated a sacrifice; his guest, pretending to strike the sacrificial victim, slew the king, and so got back his father’s kingdom.”</p>
				<p>The events on which the action of the drama turns belong to the period of transition from the heroic and fabulous to the human and historic age of Greece. The hero Hercules, the ancestor of the Messenian Aepytus, belongs to fable: but the invasion of Peloponnesus by the Dorians under chiefs claiming to be descended from Hercules, and their settlement in Argos, Lacedaemon, and Messenia, belong to history. Aepytus is descended on the father’s side from Hercules, Perseus, and the kings of Argos: on the mother’s side from Pelasgus, and the aboriginal kings of Arcadia. Callisto, the daughter of the wicked Lycaon, and the mother, by Zeus, of Arcas, from whom the Arcadians took their name, was the granddaughter of Pelasgus. The birth of Arcas brought upon Callisto the anger of the virgin-goddess Artemis, whose service she followed: she was changed into a she-bear, and in this form was chased by her own son, grown to manhood. At the critical moment Zeus interposed, and the mother and son were removed from the earth, and placed among the stars: Callisto became the famous constellation of the Great Bear; her son became Arcturus, Arctophylax, or Boötes. From him, Cypselus, the maternal grandfather of Aepytus, and the children of Cypselus, Laias and Merope, were lineally descended.</p>
				<p>The events of the life of Hercules, the paternal ancestor of Aepytus, are so well known that it is hardly necessary to record them. It is sufficient to remind the reader, that, although entitled to the throne of Argos by right of descent from Perseus and Danaus, and to the thrones of Sparta and Messenia by right of conquest, he yet passed his life in labours and wanderings, subjected by the decree of fate to the commands of his far inferior kinsman, the feeble and malignant Eurystheus. Hercules, who is represented with the violence as well as the virtues of an adveturous ever-warring hero, attacked and slew Eurytus, an Euboean king, with whom he had a quarrel, and carried off the daughter of Eurytus, the beautiful Iole. The wife of Hercules, Deianeira, seized with jealous anxiety, remembered that long ago the centaur Nessus, dying by the poisoned arrows of Hercules, had assued her that the blood flowing from his mortal wound would prove an infallible love-charm to win back the affections of her husband, if she should ever lose them. With this piltre Deianeira now anointed a robe of triumph, which she sent to her victorious husband: he received it when about to offer public sacrifice, and immediately put it on: but the sun’s rays called into activity the poisoned blood with which the robe was smeared: it clung to the flesh of the hero and consumed it. In dreadful agonies Hercules caused himself to be transported from Euboea to Mount Oeta: there, under the crags of Trachis, an immense funeral pile was constructed. Recognizing the divine will in the fate which had overtaken him, the hero ascended the pile, and called on his children and followers to set it on fire. They refused; but the office was performed by Poeas, the father of Philoctetes, who, passing near, was attracted by the concourse round the pile, and who received the bow and arrows of Hercules for his reward. The flames arose, and the apotheosis of Hercules was consummated.</p>
				<p>He bequeathed to his offspring, the Heracleidae, his own claims to the kingdoms of Peloponnesus, and to the persecution of Eurystheus. They at first sought shelter with Ceyx, king of Trachis: he was too weak to protect them; and they then took refuge at Athens. The Athenians refused to deliver them up at the demand of Eurystheus: he invaded Attica, and a battle was fought near Marathon, in which, after Macaria, a daughter of Hercules, had devoted herself for the preservation of her house, Eurystheus fell, and the Heracleidae and their Athenian protectors were victorious. The memory of Macaria’s self-sacrifice was perpetuated by the name of a spring of water on the plain of Marathon, the spring Macaria. The Heracleidae then endeavoured to effect their return to Peloponnesus. Hyllus, the eldest of them, inquired of the oracle at Delphi respecting their return; he was told to return by the <em>narrow passage</em>, and in the <em>third harvest</em>. Accordingly, in the third year from that time, Hyllus led an army to the Isthmus of Corinth; but there he was encountered by an army of Achaians and Arcadians, and fell in single combat with Echemus, king of Tegea. Upon this defeat the Heracleidae retired to northern Greece: there, after much wandering, they finally took refuge with Aegimius, king of the Dorians, who appears to have been the fastest friend of their house, and whose Dorian warriors formed the army which at last achieved their return. But, for a hundred years from the date of their first attempt, the Heracleidae were defeated in their successive invasions of Peloponnesus. Cleolaus and Aristomachus, the son and grandson of Hyllus, fell in unsuccessful expeditions. At length the sons of Aristomachus, Temenus, Cresphontes, and Aristodemus, when grown up, repaired to Delphi and taxed the oracle with the non-fulfilment of the promise made to their ancestor Hyllus. But Apollo replied that his oracle had been misunderstood; for that by the <em>third harvest</em> he had meant the third generation, and by the <em>narrow passage</em> he had meant the straits of the Corinthian Gulf. After this explanation the sons of Aristomachus built a fleet at Naupactus; and finally, in the hundredth year from the death of Hyllus and the eightieth from the fall of Troy, the invasion was again attempted, and was this time successful. The son of Orestes, Tisamenus, who ruled both Argos and Lacedaemon, fell in battle; many of his vanquished subjects left their homes and retired to Achaia.</p>
				<p>The spoil was now to be divided among the conquerors. Aristodemus, the youngest of the sons of Aristomachus, did not survive to enjoy his share. He was slain at Delphi by the sons of Pylades and Electra, the kinsman of the house of Agamemnon, that house which the Heracleidae with their Dorian army dispossessed. The claims of Aristodemus descended to his two sons, Procles and Eurysthenes, children under the guardianship of their maternal uncle, Theras. Temenus, the eldest of the sons of Aristomachus, took the kingdom of Argos; for the two remaining kingdoms, that of Sparta and that of Messenia, his two nephews, who were to rule jointly, and their uncle Cresphontes, were to cast lots. Cresphontes wished to have the fertile Messenia, and induced his brother to acquiesce in a trick which secured it to him. The lot of Cresphontes and that of his two nephews were to be placed in a water-jar, and thrown out. Messenia was to belong to him whose lot came out first. With the connivance of Temenus, Cresphontes marked as his own lot a pellet composed of baked clay; as the lot of his nephews, a pellet of unbaked clay: the unbaked pellet was of course dissolved in the water, while the brick pellet fell out alone. Messenia, therefore, was assigned to Cresphontes.</p>
				<p>Messenia was at this time ruled by Melanthus, a descendant of Neleus. This ancestor, a prince of the great house of Aeolus, had come from Thessaly and succeeded to the Messenian throne on the failure of the previous dynasty. Melanthus and his race were thus foreigners in Messenia and were unpopular. His subjects offered little or no opposition to the invading Dorians; Melanthus abandoned his kingdom to Cresphontes, and retired to Athens.</p>
				<p>Cresphontes married Merope, whose native country, Arcadia, was not affected by the Dorian invasion. This marriage, the issue of which was three sons, connected him with the native population of Peloponnesus. He built a new capital of Messenia, Stenyclaros, and transferred thither, from Pylos, the seat of government: he at first proposed, it is said by Pausanias, to divide Messenia into five states, and to confer on the native Messenians equal privileges with their Dorian conquerors. The Dorians complained that his administration unduly favoured the vanquished people: his chief magnates, headed by Polyphontes, himself a descendant of Hercules, formed a cabal against him, in which he was slain with his two eldest sons. The youngest son of Cresphontes, Aepytus, then an infant, was saved by his mother, who sent him to her father, Cypselus, the king of Arcadia, under whose protection he was brought up.</p>
				<p>The drama begins at the moment when Aepytus, grown to manhood, returns secretly to Messenia to take vengeance on his father’s murderers. At this period Temenus was no longer reigning at Argos: he had been murdered by his sons, jealous of their brother-in-law, Deiphontes: the sons of Aristodemus, Procles and Eurysthenes, at variance with their guardian, were reigning at Sparta.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="merope-dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Persons of the Drama</h3>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>Laias, uncle of Aepytus, brother of Merope</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Aepytus, son of Merope and Cresphontes</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Polyphontes, king of Messenia</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Merope, widow of Cresphontes, the murdered king of Messenia</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The Chorus, of Messenian maidens</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Arcas, an old man of Merope’s household</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Messenger</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Guards, Attendants, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>The Scene is before the royal palace in Stenyclaros, the capital of Messenia. In the foreground is the tomb of Cresphontes. The action commences at day-break.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="merope-scene" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Merope</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b>.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Son of Cresphontes, we have reach’d the goal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of our night-journey, and thou see’st thy home.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behold thy heritage, thy father’s realm!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is that fruitful, fam’d Messenian land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wealthy in corn and flocks, which, when at last</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The late-relenting Gods with victory brought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Heracleidae back to Pelops’ isle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fell to thy father’s lot, the second prize.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before thy feet this recent city spreads</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Stenyclaros, which he built, and made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of his fresh-conquer’d realm the royal seat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Degrading Pylos from its ancient rule.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There stands the temple of thine ancestor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Great Hercules; and, in that public place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Zeus hath his altar, where thy father fell.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thence to the south, behold those snowy peaks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Taygetus, Laconia’s border-wall:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, on this side, those confluent streams which make</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pamisus watering the Messenian plain:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then to the north, Lycaeus and the hills</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of pastoral Arcadia, where, a babe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Snatch’d from the slaughter of thy father’s house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy mother’s kin receiv’d thee, and rear’d up.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our journey is well made, the work remains</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which to perform we made it; means for that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us consult, before this palace sends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Its inmates on their daily tasks abroad.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Haste and advise, for day comes on apace.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O brother of my mother, guardian true,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And second father from that hour when first</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mother’s faithful servant laid me down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An infant, at the hearth of Cypselus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My grandfather, the good Arcadian king⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy part it were to advise, and mine to obey.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But let us keep that purpose, which, at home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We judg’d the best; chance finds no better way.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go thou into the city, and seek out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whate’er in the Messenian people stirs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of faithful fondness for their former king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or hatred to their present; in this last</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will lie, my grandsire said, our fairest chance.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For tyrants make man good beyond himself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hate to their rule, which else would die away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their daily-practis’d chafings keep alive.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seek this; revive, unite it, give it hope;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid it rise boldly at the signal given.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meanwhile within my father’s palace I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An unknown guest, will enter, bringing word</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of my own death; but, Laias, well I hope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through that pretended death to live and reign.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</b> comes forth.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Softly, stand back!⁠—see, tow’rd palace gates</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What black procession slowly makes approach?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sad-chanting maidens clad in mourning robes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With pitchers in their hands, and fresh-pull’d flowers:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doubtless, they bear them to my father’s tomb.⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b> comes forth.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And see, to meet them, that one, grief-plung’d Form,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Severer, paler, statelier than they all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A golden circlet on her queenly brow.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Laias, Laias, let the heart speak here!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall I not greet her? shall I not leap forth? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</b> comes forth, following <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not so: thy heart would pay its moment’s speech</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By silence ever after; for, behold!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The King (I know him, even through many years)</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Follows the issuing Queen, who stops, as call’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No lingering now! straight to the city I:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do thou, till for thine entrance to this house</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The happy moment comes, lurk here unseen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behind the shelter of thy father’s tomb:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remove yet further off, if aught comes near.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, here while harbouring, on its margin lay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sole offering that thou hast, locks from thy head:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fill thy leisure with an earnest prayer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To his avenging Shade, and to the Gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who under earth watch guilty deeds of men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To guide our effort to a prosperous close. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</b> goes out. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</b> come forward. As they advance, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b>, who at first conceals himself behind the tomb, moves off the stage.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</b>.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Set down your pitchers, maidens! and fall back;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Suspend your melancholy rites awhile:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Shortly ye shall resume them with your Queen.⁠—</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I sought thee, Merope; I find thee thus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I have ever found thee; bent to keep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By sad observances and public grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A mournful feud alive, which else would die.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I blame thee not, I do thy heart no wrong:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy deep seclusion, thine unyielding gloom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thine attitude of cold, estrang’d reproach,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These punctual funeral honours, year by year</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Repeated, are in thee, I well believe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Courageous, faithful actions, nobly dar’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, Merope, the eyes of other men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Read in these actions, innocent in thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perpetual promptings to rebellious hope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>War-cries to faction, year by year renew’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beacons of vengeance, not to be let die.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And me, believe it, wise men gravely blame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ignorant men despise me, that I stand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Passive, permitting thee what course thou wilt.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yes, the crowd mutters that remorseful fear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And paralysing conscience stop my arm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When it should pluck thee from thy hostile way.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All this I bear, for, what I seek, I know;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Peace, peace is what I seek, and public calm:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Endless extinction of unhappy hates:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Union cemented for this nation’s weal.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And even now, if to behold me here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day, amid these rites, this black rob’d train,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wakens, O Queen! remembrance in thy heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too wide at variance with the peace I seek⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not violate thy noble grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prayer I came to urge I will defer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This day, to-morrow, yesterday, alike</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am, I shall be, have been, in my mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tow’rds thee; towards thy silence as thy speech.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak, therefore, or keep silence, which thou wilt.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hear me, then, speak; and let this mournful day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The twentieth anniversary of strife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henceforth be honour’d as the date of peace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yes, twenty years ago this day beheld</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king Cresphontes, thy great husband, fall;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It needs no yearly offerings at his tomb</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To keep alive that memory in my heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It lives, and, while I see the light, will live.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For we were kinsmen⁠—more than kinsmen⁠—friends:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Together we had sprung, together liv’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Together to this isle of Pelops came</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To take the inheritance of Hercules;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Together won this fair Messenian land⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas, that, how to rule it, was our broil!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He had his counsel, party, friends⁠—I mine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He stood by what he wish’d for⁠—I the same;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I smote him, when our wishes clash’d in arms⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He had smit me, had he been swift as I.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But while I smote him, Queen, I honour’d him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Me, too, had he prevail’d, he had not scorn’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enough of this!⁠—since then, I have maintain’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sceptre⁠—not remissly let it fall⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I am seated on a prosperous throne:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet still, for I conceal it not, ferments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the Messenian people what remains</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of thy dead husband’s faction; vigorous once,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now crush’d but not quite lifeless by his fall.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And these men look to thee, and from thy grief⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Something too studiously, forgive me, shown⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Infer thee their accomplice; and they say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou in secret nurturest up thy son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Him whom thou hiddest when thy husband fell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To avenge that fall, and bring them back to power.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such are their hopes⁠—I ask not if by thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Willingly fed or no⁠—their most vain hopes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I have kept conspiracy fast-chain’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till now, and I have strength to chain it still.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, Merope, the years advance;⁠—I stand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the threshold of old age, alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Always in arms, always in face of foes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The long repressive attitude of rule</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leaves me austerer, sterner, than I would;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Old age is more suspicious than the free</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And valiant heart of youth, or manhood’s firm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unclouded reason; I would not decline</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into a jealous tyrant, scourg’d with fears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Closing in blood and gloom, his sullen reign.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cares which might in me with time, I feel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beget a cruel temper, help me quell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The breach between our parties help me close;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Assist me to rule mildly: let us join</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our hands in solemn union, making friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our factions with the friendship of their chiefs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us in marriage, King and Queen, unite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Claims ever hostile else; and set thy son⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more an exile fed on empty hopes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to an unsubstantial title heir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But prince adopted by the will of power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And future king⁠—before this people’s eyes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Consider him; consider not old hates:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Consider, too, this people, who were dear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To their dead king, thy husband⁠—yea, too dear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that destroy’d him. Give them peace; thou can’st.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Merope, how many noble thoughts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many precious feelings of man’s heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many loves, how many gratitudes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do twenty years wear out, and see expire!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall they not wear one hatred out as well?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou hast forgot, then, who I am who hear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And who thou art who speakest to me? I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am Merope, thy murder’d master’s wife⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou art Polyphontes, first his friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then⁠ ⁠… his murderer. These offending tears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That murder draws⁠ ⁠… this breach that thou would’st close</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was by that murder open’d⁠ ⁠… that one child</span>
									<br/>
									<span>(If still, indeed, he lives) whom thou would’st seat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon a throne not thine to give, is heir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because thou slew’st his brothers with their father⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who can patch union here?⁠ ⁠… What can there be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But everlasting horror ’twixt us two,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gulfs of estranging blood?⁠ ⁠… Across that chasm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who can extend their hands?⁠ ⁠… Maidens, take back</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These offerings home! our rites are spoil’d to-day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not so: let these Messenian maidens mark</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fear’d and blacken’d ruler of their race,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Albeit with lips unapt to self-excuse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blow off the spot of murder from his name.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Murder!⁠—but what <em>is</em> murder? When a wretch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For private gain or hatred takes a life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We call it murder, crush him, brand his name:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when, for some great public cause, an arm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is, without love or hate, austerely rais’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against a Power exempt from common checks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dangerous to all, to be but thus annull’d⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ranks any man with murder such an act?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With grievous deeds, perhaps; with murder⁠—no!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Find then such cause, the charge of murder falls:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be judge thyself if it abound not here.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All know how weak the Eagle, Hercules,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Soaring from his death-pile on Oeta, left</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His puny, callow Eaglets; and what trials⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Infirm protectors, dubious oracles</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Construed awry, misplann’d invasions⁠—us’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two generations of his offspring up;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hardly the third, with grievous loss, regain’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their fathers’ realm, this isle, from Pelops nam’d.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who made that triumph, though deferr’d, secure?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, but the kinsmen of the royal brood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Hercules, scarce Heracleidae less</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than they? these, and the Dorian lords, whose king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aegimius gave our outcast house a home</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When Thebes, when Athens dar’d not; who in arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thrice issued with us from their pastoral vales,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shed their blood like water in our cause?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such were the dispossessors: of what stamp</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were they we dispossessed?⁠—of us I speak,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who to Messenia with thy husband came⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I speak not now of Argos, where his brother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not now of Sparta, where his nephews reign’d:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What we found here were tribes of fame obscure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much turbulence, and little constancy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Precariously rul’d by foreign lords</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From the Aeolian stock of Neleus sprung,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A house once great, now dwindling in its sons.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such were the conquer’d, such the conquerors: who</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had most thy husband’s confidence? Consult</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His acts; the wife he chose was⁠—full of virtues⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But an Arcadian princess, more akin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To his new subjects than to us; his friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were the Messenian chiefs; the laws he fram’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were aim’d at their promotion, our decline;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, finally, this land, then half-subdued,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which from one central city’s guarded seat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As from a fastness in the rocks our scant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Handful of Dorian conquerors might have curb’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He parcell’d out in five confederate states,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sowing his victors thinly through them all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mere prisoners, meant or not, among our foes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If this was fear of them, it sham’d the king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If jealousy of us, it shamed the man.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Long we refrain’d ourselves, submitted long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Construed his acts indulgently, rever’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though found perverse, the blood of Hercules:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reluctantly the rest; but, against all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One voice preach’d patience, and that voice was mine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At last it reach’d us, that he, still mistrustful,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deeming, as tyrants deem, our silence hate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unadulating grief conspiracy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had to this city, Stenyclaros, call’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A general assemblage of the realm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With compact in that concourse to deliver,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For death, his ancient to his new-made friends.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Patience was thenceforth self-destruction. I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I his chief kinsman, I his pioneer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And champion to the throne, I honouring most</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of men the line of Hercules, preferr’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The many of that lineage to the one:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What his foes dar’d not, I, his lover, dar’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, at that altar, where mid shouting crowds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He sacrific’d, our ruin in his heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Zeus, before he struck his blow, struck mine:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Struck once, and aw’d his mob, and sav’d this realm.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Murder let others call this, if they will;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, self-defence and righteous execution.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, how fair a colour can his tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who self-exculpates, lend to foulest deeds.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy trusting lord didst thou, his servant, slay;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kinsman, thou slew’st thy kinsman; friend, thy friend:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This were enough; but let me tell thee, too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hadst no cause, as feign’d, in his misrule.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ask at Argos, asked in Lacedaemon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose people, when the Heracleidae came,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were hunted out, and to Achaia fled,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether is better, to abide alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A wolfish band, in a dispeopled realm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or conquerors with conquer’d to unite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into one puissant folk, as he design’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These sturdy and unworn Messenian tribes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who shook the fierce Neleidae on their throne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who to the invading Dorians stretch’d a hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And half bestow’d, half yielded up their soil⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He would not let his savage chiefs alight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A cloud of vultures, on this vigorous race;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ravin a little while in spoil and blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, gorg’d and helpless, be assail’d and slain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He would have sav’d you from your furious selves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not in abhorr’d estrangement let you stand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He would have mix’d you with your friendly foes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Foes dazzled with your prowess, well inclin’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To reverence your lineage, more, to obey:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So would have built you, in a few short years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A just, therefore a safe, supremacy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For well he knew, what you, his chiefs, did not⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How of all human rules the over-tense</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are apt to snap; the easy-stretch’d endure.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O gentle wisdom, little understood!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O arts above the vulgar tyrant’s reach!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O policy too subtle far for sense</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of heady, masterful, injurious men!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This good he meant you, and for this he died.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet not for this⁠—else might thy crime in part</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be error deem’d⁠—but that pretence is vain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, if ye slew him for suppos’d misrule,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Injustice to his kin and Dorian friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why with the offending father did ye slay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two unoffending babes, his innocent sons?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why not on them have plac’d the forfeit crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rul’d in their name, and train’d them to your will?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had <em>they</em> misrul’d? had <em>they</em> forgot their friends?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forsworn their blood? ungratefully had <em>they</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Preferr’d Messenian serfs to Dorian lords?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No: but to thy ambition their poor lives</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were bar; and this, too, was their father’s crime.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou might’st reign he died, not for his fault</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even fancied; and his death thou wroughtest chief.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, if the other lords desir’d his fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hotlier than thou, and were by thee kept back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why dost thou only profit by his death?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy crown condemns thee, while thy tongue absolves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now to me thou tenderest friendly league,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to my son reversion to thy throne:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Short answer is sufficient; league with thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For me I deem such impious; and for him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Exile abroad more safe than heirship here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I ask thee not to approve thy husband’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, nor expect thee to admit the grounds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In reason good, which justified my deed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With women the heart argues, not the mind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, for thy children’s death, I stand assoil’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I sav’d them, meant them honour: but thy friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rose, and with fire and sword assailed my house</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By night; in that blind tumult they were slain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To chance impute their deaths, then, not to me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Such chance as kill’d the father, kill’d the sons.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>One son at least I spar’d, for still he lives.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Tyrants think him they murder not they spare.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Not much a tyrant thy free speech displays me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Thy shame secures my freedom, not thy will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Shame rarely checks the genuine tyrant’s will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>One merit, then, thou hast: exult in that.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Thou standest out, I see, repellest peace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Thy sword repell’d it long ago, not I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Doubtless thou reckonest on the help of friends.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Not help of men, although, perhaps, of Gods.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>What Gods? the Gods of concord, civil weal?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>No: the avenging Gods, who punish crime.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Beware! from thee upbraidings I receive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With pity, nay, with reverence; yet, beware!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know, I know how hard it is to think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That right, that conscience pointed to a deed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where interest seems to have enjoin’d it too.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most men are led by interest; and the few</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who are not, expiate the general sin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Involv’d in one suspicion with the base.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dizzy the path and perilous the way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which in a deed like mine a just man treads,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But it is sometimes trodden, oh! believe it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet how <em>canst</em> thou believe it? therefore thou</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast all impunity. Yet, lest thy friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Embolden’d by my lenience, think it fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And count on like impunity, and rise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have to thank thee for a fall, beware!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To rule this kingdom I intend: with sway</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clement, if may be, but to rule it: there</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Expect no wavering, no retreat, no change.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now I leave thee to these rites, esteem’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pious, but impious, surely, if their scope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be to foment old memories of wrath.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pray, as thou pour’st libations on this tomb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be deliver’d from thy foster’d hate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unjust suspicion, and erroneous fear. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</b> goes into the palace. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b> approach the tomb with their offerings.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Draw, draw near to the tomb.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Lay honey-cakes on its marge,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Pour the libation of milk,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Deck it with garlands of flowers.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Tears fall thickly the while!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Behold, O King from the dark</span>
										<br/>
										<span>House of the grave, what we do.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>O Arcadian hills,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Send us the Youth whom ye hide,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Girt with his coat for the chase,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With the low broad hat of the tann’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hunter o’ershadowing his brow:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Grasping firm, in his hand</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Advanc’d, two javelins, not now</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Dangerous alone to the deer.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>What shall I bear, O lost</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Husband and King, to thy grave?⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Pure libations, and fresh</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Flowers? But thou, in the gloom,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Discontented, perhaps,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Demandest vengeance, not grief?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sternly requirest a man,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Light to spring up to thy house?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Vengeance, O Queen, is his due,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>His most just prayer: yet his house⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>If that might soothe him below⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Prosperous, mighty, came back</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the third generation, the way</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Order’d by Fate, to their home.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And now, glorious, secure,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fill the wealth-giving thrones</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of their heritage, Pelops’ isle.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Suffering sent them, Death</span>
										<br/>
										<span>March’d with them, Hatred and Strife</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Met them entering their halls.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For from the day when the first</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Heracleidae receiv’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That Delphic hest to return,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>What hath involv’d them, but blind</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Error on error, and blood?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Truly I hear of a Maid</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of that stock born, who bestow’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Her blood that so she might make</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Victory sure to her race,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When the fight hung in doubt: but she now,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Honour’d and sung of by all,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Far on Marathon plain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Gives her name to the spring</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Macaria, blessed Child.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>She led the way of death.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the plain of Tegea,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the grave of Orestes⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Where, in secret seclusion</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of his unreveal’d tomb,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sleeps Agamemnon’s unhappy,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Matricidal, world-fam’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Seven-cubit-statur’d son⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sent forth Echemus, the victor, the king,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>By whose hand, at the Isthmus,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>At the Fate-denied Straits,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fell the eldest of the sons of Hercules,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hyllus, the chief of his house.⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Brother follow’d sister</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The all-wept way.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes; but his son’s seed, wiser-counsell’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sail’d by the Fate-meant Gulf to their conquest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Slew their enemies’ king, Tisamenus.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherefore accept that happier omen!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet shall restorer appear to the race.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Three brothers won the field,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And to two did Destiny</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Give the thrones that they conquer’d.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But the third, what delays him</span>
										<br/>
										<span>From his unattain’d crown?⁠ ⁠…</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ah Pylades and Electra,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ever faithful, untir’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Jealous, blood-exacting friends!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ye lie watching for the foe of your kin,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the passes of Delphi,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the temple-built gorge.⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>There the youngest of the band of conquerors</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Perish’d, in sight of the goal.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Grandson follow’d sire</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The all-wept way.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 4</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Thou tellest the fate of the last</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of the three Heracleidae.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Not of him, of Cresphontes thou shared’st the lot.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A king, a king was he while he liv’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Swaying the sceptre with predestin’d hand.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And now, minister lov’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Holds rule⁠—</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Ah me⁠ ⁠… Ah⁠ ⁠…</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>For the awful Monarchs below.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 5</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Thou touchest the worst of my ills.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Oh had he fallen of old</span>
										<br/>
										<span>At the Isthmus, in fight with his foes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>By Achaian, Arcadian spear!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Then had his sepulchre risen</span>
										<br/>
										<span>On the high sea-bank, in the sight</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of either Gulf, and remain’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>All-regarded afar,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Noble memorial of worth</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of a valiant Chief, to his own.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 4</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>There rose up a cry in the streets</span>
										<br/>
										<span>From the terrified people.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>From the altar of Zeus, from the crowd, came a wail.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A blow, a blow was struck, and he fell,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sullying his garment with dark-streaming blood:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>While stood o’er him a Form⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Some Form⁠—</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Ah me.⁠ ⁠… Ah.⁠ ⁠…</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Of a dreadful Presence of fear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 5</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>More piercing the second cry rang,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Wail’d from the palace within,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>From the Children.⁠ ⁠… The Fury to them,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fresh from their father, draws near.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ah bloody axe! dizzy blows!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In these ears, they thunder, they ring,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>These poor ears, still:⁠—and these eyes</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Night and day see them fall,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fiery phantoms of death,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>On the fair, curl’d heads of my sons.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 6</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Not to thee only hath come</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sorrow, O Queen, of mankind.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Had not Electra to haunt</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A palace defil’d by a death unaveng’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For years, in silence, devouring her heart?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But her nursling, her hope, came at last.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou, too, rearest in hope,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Far ’mid Arcadian hills,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Somewhere, in safety, a nursling, a light.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Yet, yet shall Zeus bring him home!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Yet shall he dawn on this land!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 7</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Him in secret, in tears,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Month after month, through the slow-dragging year,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Longing, listening to, I wait, I implore.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But he comes not. What dell,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O Erymanthus! from sight</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of his mother, which of thy glades,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O Lycaeus! conceals</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The happy hunter? He basks</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In youth’s pure morning, nor thinks</span>
										<br/>
										<span>On the blood-stain’d home of his birth.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 6</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Give not thy heart to despair.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>No lamentation can loose</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Prisoners of death from the grave:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But Zeus, who accounteth thy quarrel his own,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Still rules, still watches, and numb’reth the hours</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Till the sinner, the vengeance, be ripe.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Still, by Acheron stream,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Terrible Deities thron’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sit, and make ready the serpent, the scourge.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Still, still the Dorian boy,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Exil’d, remembers his home.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 7</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Him if high-ruling Zeus</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Bring to his mother, the rest I commit,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Willing, patient, to Zeus, to his care.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Blood I ask not. Enough</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sated, and more than enough,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Are mine eyes with blood. But if this,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O my comforters! strays</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Amiss from Justice, the Gods</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Forgive my folly, and work</span>
										<br/>
										<span>What they will!⁠—but to me give my son!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 8</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Hear us and help us, Shade of our King!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 9</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>A return, O Father! give to thy boy!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 8</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Send an avenger, Gods of the dead!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 9</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>An avenger I ask not: send me my son!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Queen, for an avenger to appear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thinking that so I pray’d aright, I pray’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I pray’d wrongly, I revoke the prayer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Forgive me, maidens, if I seem too slack</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In calling vengeance on a murderer’s head.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Impious I deem the alliance which he asks;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Requite him words severe, for seeming kind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And righteous, if he falls, I count his fall.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With this, to those unbrib’d inquisitors,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who in man’s inmost bosom sit and judge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The true avengers these, I leave his deed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By him shown fair, but, I believe, most foul.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If these condemn him, let them pass his doom!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That doom obtain effect, from Gods or men!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So be it! yet will that more solace bring</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the chaf’d heart of Justice than to mine.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear another tumult in these streets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have another murder in these halls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see another mighty victim bleed⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is small comfort for a woman here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman, O my friends, has one desire⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see secure, to live with, those she loves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can Vengeance give me back the murdered? no!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can it bring home my child? Ah, if it can,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I pray the Furies’ ever-restless band,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pray the Gods, and pray the all-seeing Sun⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Sun, who careerest through the height of Heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When o’er the Arcadian forests thou art come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And seest my stripling hunter there afield,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Put tightness in thy gold-embossèd rein,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And check thy fiery steeds, and, leaning back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Throw him a pealing word of summons down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To come, a late avenger, to the aid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of this poor soul who bare him, and his sire.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If this will bring him back, be this my prayer!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Vengeance travels in a dangerous way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Double of issue, full of pits and snares</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all who pass, pursuers and pursued⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That way is dubious for a mother’s prayer.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rather on thee I call, Husband belov’d!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May Hermes, herald of the dead, convey</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My words below to thee, and make thee hear.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bring back our son! if may be, without blood!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Install him in thy throne, still without blood!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grant him to reign there wise and just like thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More fortunate than thee, more fairly judg’d!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This for our son: and for myself I pray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Soon, having once beheld him, to descend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into the quiet gloom, where thou art now.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These words to thine indulgent ear, thy wife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I send, and these libations pour the while. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They make their offerings at the tomb. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b> then goes towards the palace.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The dead hath now his offerings duly paid.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But whither go’st thou hence, O Queen, away?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To receive Arcas, who to-day should come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bringing me of my boy the annual news.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>No certain news if like the rest it run.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Certain in this, that ’tis uncertain still.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>What keeps him in Arcadia from return?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>His grandsire and his uncles fear the risk.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Of what? it lies with them to make risk none.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Discovery of a visit made by stealth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>With arms then they should send him, not by stealth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>With arms they dare not, and by stealth they fear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>I doubt their caution little suits their ward.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>The heart of youth I know; that most I fear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>I augur thou wilt hear some bold resolve.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I dare not wish it; but, at least, to hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That my son still survives, in health, in bloom;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear that still he loves, still longs for, me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, with a light uncareworn spirit, turns</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quick from distressful thought, and floats in joy⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus much from Arcas, my old servant true,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who sav’d him from these murderous halls a babe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And since has fondly watch’d him night and day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save for this annual charge, I hope to hear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If this be all, I know not; but I know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These many years I live for this alone. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b> goes in.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Much is there which the Sea</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Conceals from man, who cannot plumb its depths.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Air to his unwing’d form denies a way,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And keeps its liquid solitudes unscal’d.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Even Earth, whereon he treads,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>So feeble is his march, so slow,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Holds countless tracts untrod.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>But more than all unplumb’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Unscaled, untrodden, is the heart of Man.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>More than all secrets hid, the way it keeps.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Nor any of our organs so obtuse,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Inaccurate, and frail,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As those with which we try to test</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Feelings and motives there.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Yea, and not only have we not explor’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That wide and various world, the heart of others,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But even our own heart, that narrow world</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Bounded in our own breast, we hardly know,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of our own actions dimly trace the causes.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Whether a natural obscureness, hiding</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That region in perpetual cloud,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Or our own want of effort, be the bar.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Therefore⁠—while acts are from their motives judged,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And to one act many most unlike motives,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>This pure, that guilty, may have each impell’d⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Power fails us to try clearly if that cause</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Assign’d us by the actor be the true one:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Power fails the man himself to fix distinctly</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The cause which drew him to his deed,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And stamp himself, thereafter, bad or good.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span><em>The most are bad</em>, wise men have said</span>
										<br/>
										<span><em>Let the best rule</em>, they say again.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The best, then, to dominion hath the right.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Rights unconceded and denied,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Surely, if rights, may be by force asserted⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>May be, nay should, if for the general weal.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The best, then, to the throne may carve his way,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And hew opposers down,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Free from all guilt of lawlessness,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Or selfish lust of personal power:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Bent only to serve Virtue,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Bent to diminish wrong.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>And truly, in this ill-rul’d world,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Well sometimes may the good desire</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To give to Virtue her dominion due.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Well may he long to interrupt</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The reign of Folly, usurpation ever,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Though fenc’d by sanction of a thousand years.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Well thirst to drag the wrongful ruler down;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Well purpose to pen back</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Into the narrow path of right,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The ignorant, headlong multitude,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Who blindly follow ever,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Blind leaders, to their bane.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 4</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>But who can say, without a fear:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>
											<em>That best, who ought to rule, am I;</em>
										</span>
										<br/>
										<span>
											<em>The mob, who ought to obey, are these;</em>
										</span>
										<br/>
										<span><em>I the one righteous, they the many bad?</em>⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Who, without check of conscience, can aver</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That he to power makes way by arms,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sheds blood, imprisons, banishes, attaints,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Commits all deeds the guilty oftenest do,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Without a single guilty thought,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Arm’d for right only, and the general good?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 4</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Therefore, with censure unallay’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Therefore, with unexcepting ban,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Zeus and pure-thoughted Justice brand</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Imperious self-asserting Violence.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sternly condemn the too bold man, who dares</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Elect himself Heaven’s destin’d arm.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And, knowing well man’s inmost heart infirm,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>However noble the committer be,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>His grounds however specious shown,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Turn with averted eyes from deeds of blood.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Epode</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Thus, though a woman, I was school’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>By those whom I revere.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Whether I learnt their lessons well,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Or, having learnt them, well apply</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To what hath in this house befall’n,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>If in the event be any proof,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The event will quickly show. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b> comes in.</i></span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Maidens, assure me if they told me true</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who told me that the royal house was here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Rightly they told thee, and thou art arriv’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Here, then, it is, where Polyphontes dwells?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>He doth: thou hast both house and master right.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Might some one straight inform him he is sought?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Inform him that thyself, for here he comes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</b> comes forth, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendants</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Guards</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O King, all hail! I come with weighty news:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most likely, grateful; but, in all case, sure.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Speak them, that I may judge their kind myself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Accept them in one word, for good or bad:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aepytus, the Messenian prince, is dead!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dead!⁠—and when died he? where? and by what hand?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And who art thou, who bringest me such news?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He perish’d in Arcadia, where he liv’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With Cypselus; and two days since he died.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One of the train of Cypselus am I.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Instruct me of the manner of his death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That will I do, and to this end I came.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, being of like age, of birth not mean,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The son of an Arcadian noble, I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was chosen his companion from a boy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on the hunting-rambles which his heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unquiet, drove him ever to pursue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through all the lordships of the Arcadian dales,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From chief to chief, I wander’d at his side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The captain of his squires, and his guard.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On such a hunting-journey, three morns since,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With beaters, hounds, and huntsmen, he and I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set forth from Tegea, the royal town.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prince at start seem’d sad, but his regard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clear’d with blithe travel and the morning air.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We rode from Tegea, through the woods of oaks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Past Arnê spring, where Rhea gave the babe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poseidon to the shepherd-boys to hide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From Saturn’s search among the new-yean’d lambs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Mantineia, with its unbak’d walls;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thence, by the Sea-God’s Sanctuary and the tomb</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whither from wintry Maenalus were brought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bones of Arcas, whence our race is nam’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On, to the marshy Orchomenian plain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the Stone Coffins;⁠—then, by Caphyae Cliffs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Pheneos with its craggy citadel.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There, with the chief of that hill-town, we lodg’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One night; and the next day, at dawn, far’d on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the Three Fountains and the Adder’s Hill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the Stymphalian Lake, our journey’s end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To draw the coverts on Cyllene’s side.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There, on a grassy spur which bathes its root</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far in the liquid lake, we sate, and drew</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cates from our hunters’ pouch, Arcadian fare,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet chestnuts, barley-cakes, and boar’s-flesh dried:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as we ate, and rested there, we talk’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of places we had pass’d, sport we had had,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of beasts of chase that haunt the Arcadian hills,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wild hog, and bear, and mountain-deer, and roe:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Last, of our quarters with the Arcadian chiefs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For courteous entertainment, welcome warm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sad, reverential homage, had our prince</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From all, for his great lineage and his woes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All which he own’d, and prais’d with grateful mind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But still over his speech a gloom there hung,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As of one shadow’d by impending death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And strangely, as we talk’d, he would apply</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The story of spots mention’d to his own;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Telling us, Arnê minded him, he too</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was sav’d a babe, but to a life obscure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which he, the seed of Hercules, dragg’d on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inglorious, and should drop at last unknown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even as those dead unepitaph’d, who lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the stone coffins at Orchomenus.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, then, he bade remember how we pass’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Mantinean Sanctuary, forbid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To foot of mortal, where his ancestor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nam’d Aepytus like him, having gone in,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was blinded by the outgushing springs of brine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, turning westward to the Adder’s Hill⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Another ancestor, nam’d, too, like me,</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span><em>Died of a snake-bite</em>, said he, <em>on that brow:</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Still at his mountain tomb men marvel, built</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Where, as life ebb’d, his bearers laid him down.</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So he play’d on; then ended, with a smile:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>This region is not happy for my race.</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We cheer’d him; but, that moment, from the copse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the lake-edge, broke the sharp cry of hounds;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prickers shouted that the stag was gone:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We sprang upon our feet, we snatch’d our spears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We bounded down the swarded slope, we plung’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through the dense ilex-thickets to the dogs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far in the woods ahead their music rang;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And many times that morn we cours’d in ring</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The forests round that belt Cyllene’s side;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till I, thrown out and tired, came to halt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On that same spur where we had sate at morn.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And resting there to breathe, I saw below</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rare, straggling hunters, foil’d by brake and crag,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the prince, single, pressing on the rear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of that unflagging quarry and the hounds.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, in the woods far down, I saw them cross</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An open glade; now he was high aloft</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On some tall scar fring’d with dark feathery pines,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Peering to spy a goat-track down the cliff,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cheering with hand, and voice, and horn his dogs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At last the cry drew to the water’s edge⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And through the brushwood, to the pebbly strand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Broke, black with sweat, the antler’d mountain-stag,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And took the lake: two hounds alone pursued;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then came the prince⁠—he shouted and plung’d in.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is a chasm rifted in the base</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of that unfooted precipice, whose rock</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Walls on one side the deep Stymphalian Lake:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There the lake-waters, which in ages gone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wash’d, as the marks upon the hills still show,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All the Stymphalian plain, are now suck’d down.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A headland, with one agèd plane-tree crown’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Parts from this cave-pierc’d cliff the shelving bay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where first the chase plung’d in: the bay is smooth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But round the headland’s point a current sets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strong, black, tempestuous, to the cavern-mouth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stoutly, under the headland’s lee, they swam:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when they came abreast the point, the race</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Caught them, as wind takes feathers, whirl’d them round</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Struggling in vain to cross it, swept them on,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stag, dogs, and hunter, to the yawning gulph.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All this, O King, not piecemeal, as to thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now told, but in one flashing instant pass’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While from the turf whereon I lay I sprang,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And took three strides, quarry and dogs were gone;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A moment more⁠—I saw the prince turn round</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once in the black and arrowy race, and cast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One arm aloft for help; then sweep beneath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The low-brow’d cavern-arch, and disappear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what I could, I did⁠—to call by cries</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some straggling hunters to my aid, to rouse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fishers who live on the lake-side, to launch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Boats, and approach, near as we dar’d, the chasm.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But of the prince nothing remain’d, save this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His boar-spear’s broken shaft, back on the lake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cast by the rumbling subterranean stream;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this, at landing spied by us and sav’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His broad-brimm’d hunter’s hat, which, in the bay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where first the stag took water, floated still.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I across the mountains brought with haste</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Cypselus, at Basilis, this news:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Basilis, his new city, which he now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Near Lycosura builds, Lycaon’s town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First city founded on the earth by men.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He to thee sends me on, in one thing glad</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While all else grieves him, that his grandchild’s death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Extinguishes distrust ’twixt him and thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I from our deplor’d mischance learn this⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The man who to untimely death is doom’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Vainly you hedge him from the assault of harm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He bears the seed of ruin in himself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus.</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So dies the last shoot of our royal tree!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who shall tell Merope this heavy news?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stranger, this news thou bringest is too great</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For instant comment, having many sides</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of import, and in silence best receiv’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether it turn at last to joy or woe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou, the zealous bearer, hast no part</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In what it hath of painful, whether now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First heard, or in its future issue shown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou for thy labour hast deserv’d our best</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Refreshment, needed by thee, as I judge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With mountain-travel and night-watching spent.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the guest-chamber lead him, some one! give</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All entertainment which a traveller needs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And such as fits a royal house to show;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To friends, still more, and labourers in our cause. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendants</b> conduct <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b> within the palace.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The youth is gone within; alas! he bears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A presence sad for some one through those doors.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Admire then, maidens, how in one short hour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The schemes, pursued in vain for twenty years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are by a stroke, though undesir’d, complete.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Crown’d with success, not in my way, but Heaven’s!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This at a moment, too, when I had urg’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A last, long-cherish’d project, in my aim</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of concord, and been baffled with disdain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fair terms of reconcilement, equal rule,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I offer’d to my foes, and they refus’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Worse terms than mine they have obtain’d from Heaven.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dire is this blow for Merope; and I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wish’d, truly wish’d, solution to our broil</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Other than by this death; but it hath come!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I speak no word of boast, but this I say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A private loss here founds a nation’s peace. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</b> goes out.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Peace, who tarriest too long;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Peace, with Delight in thy train;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Come, come back to our prayer!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Then shall the revel again</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Visit our streets, and the sound</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of the harp be heard with the pipe,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When the flashing torches appear</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the marriage-train coming on,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With dancing maidens and boys:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>While the matrons come to the doors,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the old men rise from their bench,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When the youths bring home the bride.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Not decried by my voice</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He who restores thee shall be,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Not unfavour’d by Heaven.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Surely no sinner the man,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Dread though his acts, to whose hand</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Such a boon to bring hath been given.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Let her come, fair Peace! let her come!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But the demons long nourish’d here,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Murder, Discord, and Hate,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the stormy desolate waves</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of the Thracian Sea let her leave,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Or the howling outermost Main. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b> comes forth.</i></span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A whisper through the palace flies of one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arriv’d from Tegea with weighty news;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I came, thinking to find Arcas here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye have not left this gate, which he must pass”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell me⁠—hath one not come? or, worse mischance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, but been intercepted by the King?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A messenger, sent from Arcadia here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arriv’d, and of the King had speech but now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Ah me! the wrong expectant got his news.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>The message brought was for the King design’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>How so? was Arcas not the messenger?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>A younger man, and of a different name.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>And what Arcadian news had he to tell?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Learn that from other lips, O Queen, than mine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>He kept his tale, then, for the King alone?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>His tale was meeter for that ear than thine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Why dost thou falter, and make half reply?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>O thrice unhappy, how I groan thy fate!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou frightenest and confound’st me by thy words.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O were but Arcas come, all would be well!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If so, all’s well: for look, the old man speeds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Up from the city tow’rds this gated hill. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</b> comes in.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not with the failing breath and foot of age</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My faithful follower comes. Welcome, old friend!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Faithful, not welcome, when my tale is told.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O that my over-speed and bursting grief</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had on the journey chok’d my labouring breath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lock’d my speech for ever in my breast!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet then another man would bring this news.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O honour’d Queen, thy son, my charge, is gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Too suddenly thou tellest such a loss.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look up, O Queen! look up, O mistress dear!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look up, and see thy friends who comfort thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Ah⁠ ⁠… Ah⁠ ⁠… Ah me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>And I, too, say, ah me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>Forgive, forgive the bringer of such news!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Better from thine than from an enemy’s tongue.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And yet no enemy did this, O Queen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But the wit-baffling will and hand of Heaven.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No enemy! and what hast thou, then, heard?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swift as I came, hath Falsehood been before?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A youth arriv’d but now, the son, he said,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of an Arcadian lord, our prince’s friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Jaded with travel, clad in hunter’s garb.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He brought report that his own eyes had seen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prince, in chase after a swimming stag,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swept down a chasm rifted in the cliff</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which hangs o’er the Stymphalian Lake, and drown’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah me! with what a foot doth Treason post,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While Loyalty, with all her speed, is slow!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Another tale, I trow, thy messenger</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For the King’s private ear reserves, like this</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In one thing only, that the prince is dead.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>And how then runs this true and private tale?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As much to the King’s wish, more to his shame.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This young Arcadian noble, guard and mate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Aepytus, the king seduc’d with gold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And had him at the prince’s side in leash,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ready to slip on his unconscious prey.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He on a hunting party three days since,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Among the forests on Cyllene’s side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perform’d good service for his bloody wage;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prince, and the good Laias, whom his ward</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had in a father’s place, he basely murder’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take this for true, the other tale for feign’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>And this perfidious murder who reveal’d?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>The faithless murderer’s own, no other tongue.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Did conscience goad him to denounce himself?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To Cypselus at Basilis he brought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This strange unlikely tale, the prince was drown’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>But not a word appears of murder here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Examin’d close, he own’d this story false.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then evidence came⁠—his comrades of the hunt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who saw the prince and Laias last with him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never again in lifes⁠—next, agents, fee’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ply ’twixt the Messenian king and him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spoke, and reveal’d that traffic, and the traitor.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So charg’d, he stood dumb-founder’d: Cypselus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On this suspicion, cast him into chains.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thence he escap’d⁠—and next I find him here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>His presence with the King, thou mean’st, implies⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>He comes to tell his prompter he hath sped.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Still he repeats the drowning story here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>To thee⁠—that needs no Oedipus to explain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Interpret, then; for we, it seems, are dull.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your King desired the profit of his death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not the black credit of his murderer.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That stern word “<em>murder</em>” had too dread a sound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For the Messenian hearts, who lov’d the prince.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Suspicion grave I see, but no firm proof.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace! peace! all’s clear.⁠—The wicked watch and work</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While the good sleep: the workers have the day.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He who was sent hath sped, and now comes back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To chuckle with his sender o’er the game</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which foolish innocence plays with subtle guilt.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah! now I comprehend the liberal grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of this far-scheming tyrant, and his boon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of heirship to his kingdom for my son:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He had his murderer ready, and the sword</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lifted, and that unwish’d-for heirship void⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A tale, meanwhile, forg’d for his subjects’ ears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And me, henceforth sole rival with himself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In their allegiance, me, in my son’s death-hour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When all turn’d tow’rds me, me he would have shown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To my Messenians, dup’d, disarm’d, despis’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The willing sharer of his guilty rule,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All claim to succour forfeit, to myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hateful, by each Messenian heart abhorr’d.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His offers I repelled⁠—but what of that?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If with no rage, no fire of righteous hate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such as ere now hath spurr’d to fearful deeds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weak women with a thousandth part my wrongs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But calm, but unresentful, I endur’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His offers, coldly heard them, cold repell’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While all this time I bear to linger on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this blood-delug’d palace, in whose halls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either a vengeful Fury I should stalk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else not live at all!⁠—but here I haunt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A pale, unmeaning ghost, powerless to fright</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or harm, and nurse my longing for my son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A helpless one, I know it:⁠—but the Gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have temper’d me e’en thus; and, in some souls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Misery, which rouses others, breaks the spring.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And even now, my son, ah me! my son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fain would I fade away, as I have liv’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without a cry, a struggle, or a blow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All vengeance unattempted, and descend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the invisible plains, to roam with thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fit denizen, the lampless under-world⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But with what eyes should I encounter there</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My husband, wandering with his stern compeers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Amphiaraos, or Mycenae’s king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who led the Greeks to Ilium, Agamemnon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Betray’d like him, but, not like him, aveng’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or with what voice shall I the questions meet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of my two elder sons, slain long ago,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who sadly ask me, what, if not revenge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kept me, their mother, from their side so long?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or how reply to thee, my child last-born,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Last-murder’d, who reproachfully wilt say⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Mother, I well believ’d thou lived’st on</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>In the detested palace of thy foe,</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>With patience on thy face, death in thy heart,</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Counting, till I grew up, the laggard years,</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>That our joint hands might then together pay</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>To our unhappy house the debt we owe.</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>My death makes my debt void, and doubles thine⁠—</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>But down thou fleest here, and leav’st our scourge</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Triumphant, and condemnest all our race</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>To lie in gloom, for ever unappeas’d.</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What shall I have to answer to such words?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, something must be dar’d; and, great as erst</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our dastard patience, be our daring now!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, ye swift Furies, who to him ye haunt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Permit no peace till your behests are done;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come Hermes, who dost watch the unjustly kill’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And can’st teach simple ones to plot and feign;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, lightning Passion, that with foot of fire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Advancest to the middle of a deed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Almost before ’tis plann’d; come, glowing Hate;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, baneful Mischief, from thy murky den</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under the dripping black Tartarean cliff</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which Styx’s awful waters trickle down⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inspire this coward heart, this flagging arm!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How say ye, maidens, do ye know these prayers?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are these words Merope’s⁠—is this voice mine?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Old man, old man, thou had’st my boy in charge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he is lost, and thou hast that to atone.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fly, find me on the instant where confer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The murderer and his impious setter-on:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ye, keep faithful silence, friends, and mark</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What one weak woman can achieve alone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>O mistress, by the Gods, do nothing rash!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Unfaithful servant, dost thou, too, desert me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I go! I go!⁠—yet, Queen, take this one word:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Attempting deeds beyond thy power to do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou nothing profitest thy friends, but mak’st</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our misery more, and thine own ruin sure. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</b> goes out.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>I have heard, O Queen, how a prince,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Agamemnon’s son, in Mycenae,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Orestes, died but in name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lived for the death of his foes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Peace!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>What is it?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou destroyest me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>How?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whispering hope of a life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which no stranger unknown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But the faithful servant and nurse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose tears warrant his truth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bears sad witness is lost.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Wheresoe’er men are, there is grief.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In a thousand countries, a thousand</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Homes, e’en now is there wail;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Mothers lamenting their sons.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Yes⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>Thou knowest it?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who lives, witnesses.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>True.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, is it only a fate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sure, all-common, to lose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In a land of friends, by a friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One last, murder-sav’d child?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Ah me!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou confessest the prize</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the rushing, thundering, mad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cloud-envelop’d, obscure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unapplauded, unsung</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Race of calamity, mine?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>None can truly claim that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mournful preeminence, not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Fate <em>gives</em> it, ah me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not, above all, in the doubts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Double and clashing, that hang⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>What then?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Seems it lighter, my loss,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>If, perhaps, unpierc’d by the sword,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>My child lies in his jagg’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sunless prison of rock,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>On the black wave borne to and fro?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Worse, far worse, if his friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If the Arcadian within,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With a start.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>How say’st thou? within?⁠ ⁠…</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He in the guest-chamber now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Faithlessly murder’d his friend.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye, too, ye, too, join to betray, then</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your Queen!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>What is this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye knew,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O false friends! into what</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Haven the murderer had dropp’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye kept silence?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O lov’d mistress! in fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dreading thine over-wrought mood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What I knew, I conceal’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Swear by the Gods henceforth to obey me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Unhappy one, what deed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Purposes thy despair?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I promise; but I fear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>From the altar, the unavenged tomb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fetch me the sacrifice-axe!⁠⸺⁠</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</b> goes towards the tomb of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cresphontes</b>, and their leader brings back the axe.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Husband, O cloth’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With the grave’s everlasting,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All-covering darkness! O King,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well-mourn’d, but ill-aveng’d!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Approv’st thou thy wife now?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The axe!⁠—who brings it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis here!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thy gesture, thy look,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Appals me, shakes me with awe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Thrust back now the bolt of that door!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas! alas!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behold the fastenings withdrawn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the guest-chamber door!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah! I beseech thee⁠—with tears⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Throw the door open!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td>’Tis done!⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The door of the house is thrown open: the interior of the guest-chamber is discovered, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b> asleep on a couch.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He sleeps⁠—sleeps calm. O ye all-seeing Gods!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus peacefully do ye let sinners sleep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While troubled innocents toss, and lie awake?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What sweeter sleep than this could I desire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thee, my child, if thou wert yet alive?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How often have I dream’d of thee like this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With thy soil’d hunting-coat, and sandals torn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Asleep in the Arcadian glens at noon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy head droop’d softly, and the golden curls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clustering o’er thy white forehead, like a girl’s;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The short proud lip showing thy race, thy cheeks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brown’d with thine open-air, free, hunter’s life.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah me!⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And where dost thou sleep now, my innocent boy?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In some dark fir-tree’s shadow, amid rocks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Untrodden, on Cyllene’s desolate side;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where travellers never pass, where only come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wild beasts, and vultures sailing overhead.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There, there thou liest now, my hapless child!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stretch’d among briers and stones, the slow, black gore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oozing through thy soak’d hunting-shirt, with limbs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet stark from the death-struggle, tight-clench’d hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And eyeballs staring for revenge in vain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah miserable!⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou, thou fair-skinn’d Serpent! thou art laid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In a rich chamber, on a happy bed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In a king’s house, thy victim’s heritage;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And drink’st untroubled slumber, to sleep off</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The toils of thy foul service, till thou wake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Refresh’d, and claim thy master’s thanks and gold.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wake up in hell from thine unhallow’d sleep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou smiling Fiend, and claim thy guerdon there!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wake amid gloom, and howling, and the noise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of sinners pinion’d on the torturing wheel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the stanch Furies’ never-silent scourge.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid the chief-tormentors there provide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For a grand culprit shortly coming down.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go thou the first, and usher in thy lord!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A more just stroke than that thou gav’st my son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b> advances towards the sleeping <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b>, with the axe uplifted. At the same moment <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</b> re-enters.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the Chorus</b>.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Not with him to council did the King</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Carry his messenger, but left him here.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sees <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>O Gods!⁠ ⁠…</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Foolish old man, thou spoil’st my blow!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>What do I see?⁠ ⁠…</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A murderer at death’s door.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore no words!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>A murderer?⁠ ⁠…</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And a captive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the dear next-of-kin of him he murder’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand, and let vengeance pass!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hold, O Queen, hold!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou know’st not whom thou strik’st.⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>I know his crime.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>Unhappy one! thou strik’st⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>A most just blow.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>No, by the Gods, thou slay’st⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Stand off!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>Thy son!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Ah!⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She lets the axe drop, and falls insensible.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Awaking.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Who are these? What shrill, ear-piercing scream</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Wakes me thus kindly from the perilous sleep</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Wherewith fatigue and youth had bound mine eyes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Even in the deadly palace of my foe?⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Arcas! Thou here?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Embracing him.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>O my dear master! O</span>
										<br/>
										<span>My child, my charge belov’d, welcome to life!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As dead we held thee, mourn’d for thee as dead.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In word I died, that I in deed might live.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But who are these?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>Messenian maidens, friends.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>And, Arcas!⁠—but I tremble!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>Boldly ask.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>That black-rob’d, swooning figure?⁠ ⁠…</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</td>
							<td>Merope.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>O mother! mother!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Who upbraids me? Ah!⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Seeing the axe.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Upbraids thee? no one.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Thou dost well: but take⁠ ⁠…</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>What wav’st thou off?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>That murderous axe away!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Thy son is here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>One said so, sure, but now.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Here, here thou hast him!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Slaughter’d by this hand!⁠ ⁠…</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>No, by the Gods, alive and like to live!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>What, thou?⁠—I dream⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>May’st thou dream ever so!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Advancing towards him.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>My child? unhurt?⁠ ⁠…</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Only by over joy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Art thou, then, come?⁠ ⁠…</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Never to part again. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They fall into one another’s arms. Then <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</b>, holding <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b> by the hand, turns to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O kind Messenian maidens, O my friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bear witness, see, mark well, on what a head</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My first stroke of revenge had nearly fallen!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We see, dear mistress: and we say, the Gods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As hitherto they kept him, keep him now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>O my son!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I have, I have thee⁠ ⁠… the years</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fly back, my child! and thou seem’st</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ne’er to have gone from these eyes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Never been torn from this breast.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mother, my heart runs over: but the time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Presses me, chides me, will not let me weep.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Fearest thou now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>I fear not, but I think on my design.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>At the undried fount of this breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A babe, thou smilest again.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy brothers play at my feet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Early-slain innocents! near,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy kind-speaking father stands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Remember, to revenge his death I come!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Ah⁠ ⁠… revenge!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That word! it kills me! I see</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Once more roll back on my house,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Never to ebb, the accurs’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>All-flooding ocean of blood.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mother, sometimes the justice of the Gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Appoints the way to peace through shedding blood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Sorrowful peace!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>And yet the only peace to us allow’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>From the first-wrought vengeance is born</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A long succession of crimes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fresh blood flows, calling for blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fathers, sons, grandsons, are all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One death-dealing vengeful train.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mother, thy fears are idle: for I come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To close an old wound, not to open new.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all else willing to be taught, in this</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Instruct me not; I have my lesson clear.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arcas, seek out my uncle Laias, now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Conferring in the city with our friends;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here bring him, ere the king come back from council:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, how to accomplish what the Gods enjoin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the slow-ripening time at last prepares,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We two with thee, my mother, may consult:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For whose help dare I count on if not thine?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Approves my brother Laias this design?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Yes, and alone is with me here to share.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And what of thine Arcadian mate, who bears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Suspicion from thy grandsire of thy death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For whom, as I suppose, thou passest here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sworn to our plot he is: but, that surmise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fix’d him the author of my death, I knew not.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Proof, not surmise, shows him in commerce close⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>With this Messenian tyrant⁠—that I know.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>And entertain’st thou, child, such dangerous friends?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>This commerce for my best behoof he plies.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>That thou may’st read thine enemy’s counsel plain?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Too dear his secret wiles have cost our house.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>And of his unsure agent what demands he?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>News of my business, pastime, temper, friends.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>His messages, then, point not to thy murder?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Not yet; though such, no doubt, his final aim.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>And what Arcadian helpers bring’st thou here?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Laias alone; no errand mine for crowds.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>On what relying, to crush such a foe?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>One sudden stroke, and the Messenians’ love.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O thou long-lost, long seen in dreams alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now seen face to face, my only child!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why wilt thou fly to lose as soon as found</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My new-won treasure, thy belovèd life?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or how expectest not to lose, who com’st</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With such slight means to cope with such a foe?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thine enemy thou know’st not, nor his strength.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The stroke thou purposest is desperate, rash⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet grant that it succeeds;⁠—thou hast behind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The stricken king a second enemy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scarce dangerous less than him, the Dorian lords.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These are not now the savage band who erst</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Follow’d thy father from their northern hills,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mere ruthless and uncounsell’d tools of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good to obey, without a leader naught.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their chief hath train’d them, made them like himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sagacious, men of iron, watchful, firm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against surprise and sudden panic proof:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their master fall’n, these will not flinch, but band</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To keep their master’s power: thou wilt find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behind his corpse their hedge of serried spears.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, to match these, thou hast the people’s love?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On what a reed, my child, thou leanest there!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knowest thou not how timorous, how unsure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How useless an ally a people is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the one and certain arm of power?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy father perish’d in this people’s cause,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perish’d before their eyes, yet no man stirr’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For years, his widow, in their sight I stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A never-changing index to revenge⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What help, what vengeance, at their hands have I?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At least, if thou wilt trust them, try them first:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the King himself array the host</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou countest on to back thee ’gainst his lords:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First rally the Messenians to thy cause,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give them cohesion, purpose, and resolve,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Marshal them to an army⁠—then advance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then try the issue; and not, rushing on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Single and friendless, give to certain death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That dear-belov’d, that young, that gracious head.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be guided, O my son! spurn counsel not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For know thou this, a violent heart hath been</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fatal to all the race of Hercules.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>With sage experience she speaks; and thou,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Aepytus, weigh well her counsel given.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ill counsel, in my judgment, gives she here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Maidens, and reads experience much amiss;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Discrediting the succour which our cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might from the people draw, if rightly us’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Advising us a course which would, indeed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If follow’d, make their succour slack and null.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A people is no army, train’d to fight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A passive engine, at their general’s will;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if so us’d, proves, as thou say’st, unsure.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A people, like a common man, is dull,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is lifeless, while its heart remains untouch’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A fool can drive it, and a fly may scare:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When it admires and loves, its heart awakes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then irresistibly it lives, it works:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A people, then, is an ally indeed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is ten thousand fiery wills in one.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now I, if I invite them to run risk</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of life for my advantage, and myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who chiefly profit, run no more than they⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How shall I rouse their love, their ardour so?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, if some signal, unassisted stroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dealt at my own sole risk, before their eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Announces me their rightful prince return’d⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The undegenerate blood of Hercules⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The daring claimant of a perilous throne⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How might not such a sight as this revive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their loyal passion tow’rd my father’s house?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Electrify their hearts? make them no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A craven mob, but a devouring fire?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then might I use them, then, for one who thus</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spares not himself, themselves they will not spare.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Haply, had but one daring soul stood forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To rally them and lead them to revenge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When my great father fell, they had replied:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas! our foe alone stood forward then.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou, my mother, hadst thou made a sign⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hadst thou, from thy forlorn and captive state</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of widowhood in these polluted halls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy prison-house, rais’d one imploring cry⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who knows but that avengers thou hadst found?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But mute thou sat’st, and each Messenian heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In thy despondency desponded too.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enough of this!⁠—Though not a finger stir</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To succour me in my extremest need;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though all free spirits in this land were dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And only slaves and tyrants left alive⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet for me, mother, I had liefer die</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On native ground, than drag the tedious hours</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of a protected exile any more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hate, duty, interest, passion call one way;]:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here stand I now, and the attempt shall be.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Prudence is on the other side; but deeds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Condemn’d by prudence have sometimes gone well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not till the ways of prudence all are tried,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tried in vain, the turn of rashness comes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou leapest to thy deed, and hast not ask’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy kinsfolk and thy father’s friends for aid.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>And to what friends should I for aid apply?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>The royal race of Temenus, in Argos⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>That house, like ours, intestine murder maims.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Thy Spartan cousins, Procles and his brother⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Love a won cause, but not a cause to win.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>My father, then, and his Arcadian chiefs⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Mean still to keep aloof from Dorian broil.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Wait, then, until sufficient help appears.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>Orestes in Mycenae had no more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>He to fulfil an order rais’d his hand.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>What order more precise had he than I?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Apollo peal’d it from his Delphian cave.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>A mother’s murder needed hest divine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>He had a hest, at least, and thou hast none.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td>The Gods command not where the heart speaks clear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Thou wilt destroy, I see, thyself and us.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O suffering! O calamity! how ten,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How twentyfold worse are ye, when your blows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not only wound the sense, but kill the soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The noble thought, which is alone the man!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I, to-day returning, find myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Orphan’d of both my parents⁠—by his foes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father, by your strokes my mother slain!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this is not my mother, who dissuades,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At the dread altar of her husband’s tomb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His son from vengeance on his murderer;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not alone dissuades him, but compares</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His just revenge to an unnatural deed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A deed so awful, that the general tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fluent of horrors, falters to relate it⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of darkness so tremendous, that its author,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though to his act empower’d, nay, impell’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the oracular sentence of the Gods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fled, for years after, o’er the face of earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A frenzied wanderer, a God-driven man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hardly yet, some say, hath found a grave⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With such a deed as <em>this</em> thou matchest mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which Nature sanctions, which the innocent blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clamours to find fulfill’d, which good men praise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And only bad men joy to see undone?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O honour’d father! hide thee in thy grave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deep as thou canst, for hence no succour comes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since from thy faithful subjects what revenge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Canst thou expect, when thus thy widow fails?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas! an adamantine strength indeed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Past expectation, hath thy murderer built:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this is the true strength of guilty kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When they corrupt the souls of those they rule.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Zeal makes him most unjust: but, in good time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here, as I guess, the noble Laias comes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Break off, break off your talking, and depart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Each to his post, where the occasion calls;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest from the council-chamber presently</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The King return, and find you prating here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A time will come for greetings; but to-day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hour for words is gone, is come for deeds.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O princely Laias! to what purpose calls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The occasion, if our chief confederate fails?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mother stands aloof, and blames our deed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My royal sister?⁠ ⁠… but, without some cause,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know, she honours not the dead so ill.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brother, it seems thy sister must present,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At this first meeting after absence long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not welcome, exculpation to her kin:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet exculpation needs it, if I seek,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman and a mother, to avert</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Risk from my new-restor’d, my only son?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sometimes, when he was gone, I wish’d him back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Risk what he might; now that I have him here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now that I feed mine eyes on that young face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear that fresh voice, and clasp that gold-lock’d head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I shudder, Laias, to commit my child</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Murder’s dread arena, where I saw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His father and his ill-starr’d brethren fall:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I loathe for him the slippery way of blood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I ask if bloodless means may gain his end.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In me the fever of revengeful hate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Passion’s first furious longing to imbrue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our own right hand in the detested blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of enemies, and count their dying groans⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If in this feeble bosom such a fire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did ever burn⁠—is long by time allay’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I would now have Justice strike, not me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides⁠—for from my brother and my son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hide not even this⁠—the reverence deep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remorseful, tow’rd my hostile solitude,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Polyphontes never fail’d-in once</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through twenty years; his mournful anxious zeal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To efface in me the memory of his crime⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though it efface not that, yet makes me wish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His death a public, not a personal act,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Treacherously plotted ’twixt my son and me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom this day he came to proffer peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Treaty, and to this kingdom for my son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heirship, with fair intent, as I believe:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that he plots thy death, account it false;</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Number it with the thousand rumours vain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Figments of plots, wherewith intriguers fill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The enforcèd leisure of an exile’s ear:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Immers’d in serious state-craft is the King,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bent above all to pacify, to rule,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rigidly, yet in settled calm, this realm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not prone, all say, to useless bloodshed now.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So much is due to truth, even tow’rds our foe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do I, then, give to usurpation grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from his natural rights my son debar?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not so: let him⁠—and none shall be more prompt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than I to help⁠—raise his Messenian friends;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let him fetch succours from Arcadia, gain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His Argive or his Spartan cousins’ aid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let him do this, do aught but recommence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Murder’s uncertain, secret, perilous game⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I, when to his righteous standard down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Flies Victory wing’d, and Justice raises <em>then</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her sword, will be the first to bid it fall.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If, haply, at this moment, such attempt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Promise not fair, let him a little while</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have faith, and trust the future and the Gods.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He may⁠—for never did the Gods allow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fast permanence to an ill-gotten throne.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These are but woman’s words;⁠—yet, Laias, thou</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Despise them not! for, brother, thou, like me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wert not among the feuds of warrior-chiefs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Each sovereign for his dear-bought hour, born;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in the pastoral Arcadia rear’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With Cypselus our father, where we saw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The simple patriarchal state of kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where sire to son transmits the unquestion’d crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unhack’d, unsmirch’d, unbloodied, and have learnt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That spotless hands unshaken sceptres hold.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having learnt this, then, use thy knowledge now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Which way to lean I know not: bloody strokes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are never free from doubt, though sometimes due.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Merope, the common heart of man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Agrees to deem some deeds so horrible,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That neither gratitude, nor tie of race,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Womanly pity, nor maternal fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor any pleader else, shall be indulg’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To breathe a syllable to bar revenge.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All this, no doubt, thou to thyself hast urg’d⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Time presses, so that theme forbear I now:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Direct to thy dissuasions I reply.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blood-founded thrones, thou say’st, are insecure;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our father’s kingdom, because pure, is safe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>True; but what cause to our Arcadia gives</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Its privileg’d immunity from blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that, since first the black and fruitful Earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the primeval mountain-forests bore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pelasgus, our forefather and mankind’s,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Legitimately sire to son, with us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bequeaths the allegiance of our shepherd-tribes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More loyal, as our line continues more?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How can your Heracleidan chiefs inspire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This awe which guards our earth-sprung, lineal kings?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What permanence, what stability like ours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether blood flows or no, can yet invest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The broken order of your Dorian thrones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fix’d yesterday, and ten times chang’d since then?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two brothers, and their orphan nephews, strove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For the three conquer’d kingdoms of this isle:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The eldest, mightiest brother, Temenus, took</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Argos: a juggle to Cresphontes gave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>MesseniaL to those helpless Boys, the lot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Worst of the three, the stony Sparta, fell.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>August, indeed, was the foundation here!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What followed?⁠—His most trusted kinsman slew</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cresphontes in Messenia; Temenus</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perish’d in Argos by his jealous sons:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Spartan Brothers with their guardian strive:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can houses thus ill-seated⁠—thus embroil’d⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus little founded in their subjects’ love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Practise the indulgent, bloodless policy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of dynasties long-fix’d, and honour’d long?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No! Vigour and severity must chain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Popular reverence to these recent lines;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be their first-founded order strict maintain’d⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their murder’d rulers terribly avenged⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ruthlessly their rebellious subjects crush’d.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since policy bids thus, what fouler death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than thine illustrious husband’s to avenge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall we select?⁠—than Polyphontes, what</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More daring and more grand offender find?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Justice, my sister, long demands this blow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Wisdom, now thou see’st, demands it too:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To strike it, then, dissuade thy son no more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For to live disobedient to these two,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Justice and Wisdom, is no life at all.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The Gods, O mistress dear! the hard-soul’d man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who spar’d not others, bid not us to spare.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas! against my brother, son, and friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One, and a woman, how can I prevail?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O brother! thou hast conquer’d; yet, I fear.⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Son! with a doubting heart thy mother yields⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May it turn happier than my doubts portend!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Meantime on thee the task of silence only</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall be impos’d; to us shall be the deed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, not another word, but to our act!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nephew! thy friends are sounded, and prove true:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy father’s murderer, in the public place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Performs, this noon, a solemn sacrifice:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go with him⁠—choose the moment⁠—strike thy blow!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If prudence counsels thee to go unarm’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sacrificer’s axe will serve thy turn.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To me and the Messenians leave the rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With the Gods’ aid⁠—and, if they give but aid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As our just cause deserves, I do not fear. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</b> go out.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>O Son and Mother,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Whom the Gods o’ershadow</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In dangerous trial,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With certainty of favour!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As erst they shadow’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Your race’s founders</span>
										<br/>
										<span>From irretrievable woe:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When the seed of Lycaon</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Lay forlorn, lay outcast,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Callisto and her Boy.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>What deep-grass’d meadow</span>
										<br/>
										<span>At the meeting valleys⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Where clear-flowing Ladon,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Most beautiful of waters,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Receives the river</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Whose trout are vocal,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The Aroanian stream⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Without home, without mother,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hid the babe, hid Arcas,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The nursling of the dells?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>But the sweet-smelling myrtle,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the pink-flower’d oleander,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the green agnus-castus,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To the West-Wind’s murmur,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Rustled round his cradle;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And Maia rear’d him.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Then, a boy, he startled,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the snow-fill’d hollows</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of high Cyllene,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The white mountain-birds;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Or surpris’d, in the glens,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The basking tortoises,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Whose striped shell founded</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the hand of Hermes</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The glory of the lyre.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>But his mother, Callisto,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In her hiding-place of the thickets</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of the lentisk and ilex</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In her rough form, fearing</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The hunter on the outlook,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Poor changeling! trembled.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Or the children, plucking</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the thorn-chok’d gullies</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Wild gooseberries, scar’d her,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The shy mountain-bear.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Or the shepherds, on slopes</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With pale-spik’d lavender</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And crisp thyme tufted,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Came upon her, stealing</span>
										<br/>
										<span>At day-break through the dew.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Once, ’mid those gorges,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Spray-drizzled, lonely,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Unclimb’d by man⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O’er whose cliffs the townsmen</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of crag-perch’d Nonacris</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Behold in summer</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The slender torrent</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of Styx come dancing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A wind-blown thread⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>By the precipices of Khelmos,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The fleet, desperate hunter,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The youthful Arcas, born of Zeus,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>His fleeing mother,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Transform’d Callisto,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Unwitting follow’d⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And raised his spear.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Turning, with piteous</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Distressful longing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Sad, eager eyes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Mutely she regarded</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Her well-known enemy.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Low moans half utter’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>What speech refus’d her;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Tears cours’d, tears human,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Down those disfigur’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Once human cheeks.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With unutterable foreboding</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Her son, heart-stricken, ey’d her.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The Gods had pity, made them Stars.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Stars now they sparkle</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In the northern Heaven;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The guard Arcturus,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The guard-watch’d Bear.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Epode</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>So, o’er thee and thy child,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Some God, Merope, now,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In dangerous hour, stretches his hand.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>So, like a star, dawns thy son,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Radiant with fortune and joy. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</b> comes in.</i></span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Merope, the trouble on thy face</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tells me enough thou know’st the news which all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Messenia speaks: the prince, thy son, is dead.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not from my lips should consolation fall;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To offer that, I come not; but to urge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even after news of this sad death, our league.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yes, once again I come; I will not take</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This morning’s angry answer for thy last:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the Messenian kingdom thou and I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are the sole claimants left; what cause of strife</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lay in thy son is buried in his grave.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most honourably I meant, I call the Gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To witness, offering him return and power:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, had he liv’d, suspicion, jealousy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inevitably had surg’d up, perhaps,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twixt thee and me; suspicion, that I nurs’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some ill design against him; jealousy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he enjoy’d but part, being heir to all.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he himself, with the impetuous heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of youth, ’tis like, had never quite forgone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The thought of vengeance on me, never quite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unclos’d his itching fingers from his sword.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou, O Merope, though deeply wrong’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though injur’d past forgiveness, as men deem,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet hast been long at school with thoughtful Time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from that teacher may’st have learn’d, like me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all may be endur’d, and all forgiv’n;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have learn’d that we must sacrifice the thirst</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of personal vengeance to the public weal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have learn’d, that there are guilty deeds, which leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hand that does them guiltless; in a word,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That kings live for their peoples, not themselves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This having learn’d, let us a union found</span>
									<br/>
									<span>(For the last time I ask, ask earnestly)</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bas’d on pure public welfare; let us be⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not Merope and Polyphontes, foes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blood-sever’d⁠—but Messenia’s King and Queen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us forget ourselves for those we rule.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak: I go hence to offer sacrifice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the Preserver Zeus; let me return</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thanks to him for our amity as well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Oh had’st thou, Polyphontes, still but kept</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The silence thou hast kept for twenty years!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Henceforth, if what I urge displease, I may:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But fair proposal merits fair reply.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And thou shalt have it! Yes, because thou <em>hast</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>For twenty years forborne to interrupt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The solitude of her whom thou hast wrong’d⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That scanty grace shall earn thee this reply.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, for our union. Trust me, ’twixt us two</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The brazen footed Fury ever stalks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Waving her hundred hands, a torch in each,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aglow with angry fire, to keep us twain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, for thyself. Thou com’st with well-cloak’d joy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To announce the ruin of my husband’s house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To sound thy triumph in his widow’s ears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bid her share thine unendanger’d throne:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To this thou would’st have answer.⁠—Take it: Fly!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cut short thy triumph, seeming at its height;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fling off thy crown, suppos’d at last secure;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forsake this ample, proud Messenian realm:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To some small, humble, and unnoted strand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some rock more lonely than that Lemnian isle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where Philoctetes pin’d, take ship and flee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some solitude more inaccessible</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than the ice-bastion’d Caucasian Mount</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chosen a prison for Prometheus, climb:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There in unvoic’d oblivion hide thy name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid the sun, thine only visitant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Divulge not to the far-off world of men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What once-fam’d wretch he he hath seen lurking there.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There nurse a late remorse, and thank the Gods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thank thy bitterest foe, that, having lost</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All things but life, thou lose not life as well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>What mad bewilderment of grief is this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td><em>Thou</em> art bewilder’d: the sane head is mine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>I pity thee, and wish thee calmer mind.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Pity thyself; none needs compassion more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Yet, oh! could’st thou but act as reason bids!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>And in my turn I wish the same for thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>All I could do to soothe thee has been tried.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>For that, in this my warning, thou art paid.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Know’st thou then aught, that thus thou sound’st the alarm?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Thy crime: that were enough to make one fear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>My deed is of old date, and long aton’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Aton’d this very day, perhaps, it is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>My final victory proves the Gods appeas’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>O victor, victor, trip not at the goal!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Hatred and passionate Envy blind thine eyes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>O Heaven-abandon’d wretch, that envies thee!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>Thou hold’st so cheap, then, the Messenian crown?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>I think on what the future hath in store.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>To-day I reign: the rest I leave to Fate.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>For Fate thou wait’st not long; since, in this hour⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td>What? for so far Fate hath not prov’d my foe⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Fate seals my lips, and drags to ruin thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Enough! enough! I will no longer hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ill-boding note which frantic Envy sounds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To affright a fortune which the Gods secure.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once more my friendship thou rejectest: well!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More for this land’s sake grieve I, than mine own.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I chafe not with thee, that thy hate endures,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor bend myself too low, to make it yield.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What I have done is done; by my own deed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Neither exulting nor asham’d, I stand.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why should this heart of mine set mighty store</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the construction and report of men?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not men’s good-word hath made me what I am.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alone I master’d power; and alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since so thou wilt, I dare maintain it still. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</b> goes out.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Did I then waver</span>
										<br/>
										<span>(O woman’s judgment!)</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Misled by seeming</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Success of crime?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And ask, if sometimes</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The Gods, perhaps, allow’d you,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O lawless daring of the strong,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O self-will recklessly indulg’d?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Not time, not lightning,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Not rain, not thunder,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Efface the endless</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Decrees of Heaven⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Make Justice alter,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Revoke, assuage her sentence,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Which dooms dread ends to dreadful deeds,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And violent deaths to violent men.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>But the signal example</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of invariableness of justice</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Our glorious founder</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hercules gave us,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Son lov’d of Zeus his father: for he err’d,</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>And the strand of Euboea,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the promontory of Cenaeum,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>His painful, solemn</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Punishment witness’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Beheld his expiation: for he died.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>O villages of Oeta</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With hedges of the wild rose!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O pastures of the mountain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of short grass, beaded with dew,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Between the pine-woods and the cliffs!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O cliffs, left by the eagles,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>On that morn, when the smoke-cloud</span>
										<br/>
										<span>From the oak-built, fiercely-burning pyre,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Up the precipices of Trachis,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Drove them screaming from their eyries!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A willing, a willing sacrifice on that day</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ye witness’d, ye mountain lawns,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When the shirt-wrapt, poison-blister’d Hero</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ascended, with undaunted heart,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Living, his own funeral-pile,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And stood, shouting for a fiery torch;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the kind, chance-arriv’d Wanderer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a></span>
										<br/>
										<span>The inheritor of the bow,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Coming swiftly through the sad Trachinians,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Put the torch to the pile:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That the flame tower’d on high to the Heaven</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Bearing with it, to Olympus,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To the side of Hebe,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To immortal delight,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The labour-releas’d Hero.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>O heritage of Neleus,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ill-kept by his infirm heirs!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O kingdom of Messenê,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of rich soil, chosen by craft,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Possess’d in hatred, lost in blood!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O town, high Stenyclaros,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With new walls, which the victors</span>
										<br/>
										<span>From the four-town’d, mountain-shadow’d Doris,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For their Hercules-issu’d princes</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Built in strength against the vanquish’d!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Another, another sacrifice on this day</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ye witness, ye new-built towers!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When the white-rob’d, garland-crowned Monarch</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Approaches, with undoubting heart,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Living, his own sacrifice-block,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And stands, shouting for a slaughterous axe;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the stern, Destiny-brought Stranger,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The inheritor of the realm,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Coming swiftly through the jocund Dorians,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Drives the axe to its goal:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That the blood rushes in streams to the dust;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Bearing with it, to Erinnys,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To the Gods of Hades,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To the dead unaveng’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The fiercely-required Victim.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Epode</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Knowing he did it, unknowing pays for it.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Unknowing, unknowing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thinking aton’d-for</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Deeds unatonable,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thinking appeas’d</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Gods unappeasable,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Lo, the Ill-fated One,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Standing for harbour,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Right at the harbour-mouth,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Strikes, with all sail set,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Full on the sharp-pointed</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Needle of ruin! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b> comes in.</i></span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O honour’d Queen, O faithful followers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of your dead master’s line, I bring you news</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make the gates of this long-mournful house</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leap, and fly open of themselves for joy!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Noise and shouting heard.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hark how the shouting crowds tramp hitherward</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With glad acclaim! Ere they forestall my news,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accept it:⁠—Polyphontes is no more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td>Is my son safe? that question bounds my care.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td>He is, and by the people hail’d for king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The rest to me is little: yet, since that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must from some mouth be heard, relate it thou.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not little, if thou saw’st what love, what zeal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At thy dead husband’s name the people show.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For when this morning in the public square</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I took my stand, and saw the unarm’d crowds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of citizens in holiday attire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Women and children intermix’d; and then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Group’d around Zeus’s altar, all in arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Serried and grim, the ring of Dorian lords⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I trembled for our prince and his attempt.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Silence and expectation held us all:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till presently the King came forth, in robe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of sacrifice, his guards clearing the way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before him⁠—at his side, the prince, thy son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unarm’d and travel-soil’d, just as he was:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With him conferring the King slowly reach’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The altar in the middle of the square,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where, by the sacrificing minister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flower-dress’d victim stood, a milk-white bull,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swaying from side to side his massy head</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With short impatient lowings: there he stopp’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And seem’d to muse awhile, then rais’d his eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To heaven, and laid his hand upon the steer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cried: <em>O Zeus, let what blood-guiltiness</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>Yet stains our land be by this blood wash’d out,</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>And grant henceforth to the Messenians peace!</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That moment, while with upturn’d eyes he pray’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prince snatch’d from the sacrificer’s hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The axe, and on the forehead of the King,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where twines the chaplet, dealt a mighty blow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which fell’d him to the earth, and o’er him stood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shouted⁠—<em>Since by thee defilement came,</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>What blood so meet as thine to wash it out?</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>What hand to strike thee meet as mine, the hand</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span><em>Of Aepytus, thy murder’d master’s son?</em>⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, gazing at him from the ground, the King⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span><em>Is it, then, thou?</em> he murmur’d; and with that,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He bow’d his head, and deeply groan’d, and died.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till then we all seem’d stone: but then a cry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Broke from the Dorian lords: forward they rush’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To circle the prince round: when suddenly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Laias in arms sprang to his nephew’s side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Crying⁠—<em>O ye Messenians, will ye leave</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<em>The son to perish as ye left the sire?</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from that moment I saw nothing clear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For from all sides a deluge, as it seem’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Burst o’er the altar and the Dorian lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of holiday-clad citizens transform’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To armed warriors: I heard vengeful cries;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I heard the clash of weapons; then I saw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Dorians lying dead, thy son hail’d king.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, truly, one who sees, what seem’d so strong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The power of this tyrant and his lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Melt like a passing smoke, a nightly dream,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At one bold word, one enterprising blow⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might ask, why we endur’d their yoke so long:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that we know how every perilous feat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of daring, easy as it seems when done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is easy at no moment but the right.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou speakest well; but here, to give our eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Authentic proof of what thou tell’st our ears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The conquerors, with the King’s dead body, come. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcas</b> come in with the dead body of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Polyphontes</b>, followed by a crowd of the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenians</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Laias</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sister, from this day forth thou art no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The widow of a husband unaveng’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The anxious mother of an exil’d son.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thine enemy is slain, thy son is king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rejoice with us! and trust me, he who wish’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Welfare to the Messenian state, and calm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could find no way to found them sure as this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mother, all these approve me: but if thou</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Approve not too, I have but half my joy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merope</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Aepytus, my son, behold, behold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This iron man, my enemy and thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This politic sovereign, lying at our feet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With blood-bespatter’d robes, and chaplet shorn!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inscrutable as ever, see, it keeps</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Its sombre aspect of majestic care,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of solitary thought, unshar’d resolve,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in death, that countenance austere.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So look’d he, when to Stenyclaros first,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A new-made wife, I from Arcadia came,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And found him at my husband’s side, his friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His kinsman, his right hand in peace and war;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unsparing in his service of his toil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His blood; to me, for I confess it, kind:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So look’d he in that dreadful day of death:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, when he pleaded for our league but now.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What meantest thou, O Polyphontes, what</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Desired’st thou, what truly spurr’d thee on?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was policy of state, the ascendency</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the Heracleidan conquerors, as thou said’st,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Indeed thy lifelong passion and sole aim?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or did’st thou but, as cautious schemers use,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cloak thine ambition with these specious words?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know not; just, in either case, the stroke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which laid thee low, for blood requires blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But yet, not knowing this, I triumph not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over thy corpse, triumph not, neither mourn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I find worth in thee, and badness too.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What mood of spirit, therefore, shall we call</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The true one of a man⁠—what way of life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His fix’d condition and perpetual walk?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>None, since a twofold colour reigns in all.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou, my son, study to make prevail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One colour in thy life, the hue of truth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Justice, that sage Order, not alone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Natural Vengeance, may maintain thine act,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make it stand indeed the will of Heaven.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy father’s passion was this people’s ease,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This people’s anarchy, thy foe’s pretence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As the chiefs rule, indeed, the people are:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unhappy people, where the chiefs themselves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are, like the mob, vicious and ignorant!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So rule, that even thine enemies may fail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To find in thee a fault whereon to found,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of tyrannous harshness, or remissness weak:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So rule, that as thy father thou be lov’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So rule, that as his foe thou be obey’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take these, my son, over thine enemy’s corpse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy mother’s prayers: and this prayer last of all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That even in thy victory thou show,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mortal, the moderation of a man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aepytus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O mother, my best diligence shall be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all by thy experience to be rul’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where my own youth falls short. But, Laias, now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First work after such victory, let us go</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To render to my true Messenians thanks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the Gods grateful sacrifice; and then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Assume the ensigns of my father’s power.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Son of Cresphontes, past what perils</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Com’st thou, guided safe, to thy home!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What things daring! what enduring!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all this by the will of the Gods.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="rugby-chapel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Rugby Chapel</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">November, 1857</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Coldly, sadly descends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The autumn evening. The Field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strewn with its dank yellow drifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wither’d leaves, and the elms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fade into dimness apace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent;⁠—hardly a shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a few boys late at their play!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lights come out in the street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the school-room windows; but cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solemn, unlighted, austere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the gathering darkness, arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chapel walls, in whose bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, my father! art laid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There thou dost lie, in the gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the autumn evening. But ah!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That word, <em>gloom</em>, to my mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings thee back in the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy radiant vigour again!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the gloom of November we pass’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Days not dark at thy side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seasons impair’d not the ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thine even cheerfulness clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such thou wast; and I stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the autumn evening, and think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bygone autumns with thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fifteen years have gone round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou arosest to tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the summer-morning, the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of death, at a call unforeseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden. For fifteen years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We who till then in thy shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rested as under the boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a mighty oak, have endured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sunshine and rain as we might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bare, unshaded, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lacking the shelter of thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O strong soul, by what shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tarriest thou now? For that force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely, has not been left vain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere, surely, afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sounding labour-house vast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of being, is practised that strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zealous, beneficent, firm!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, in some far-shining sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conscious or not of the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still thou performest the word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Spirit in whom thou dost live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prompt, unwearied, as here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still thou upraisest with zeal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The humble good from the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sternly repressest the bad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, like a trumpet, dost rouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those who with half-open eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tread the border-land dim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt vice and virtue; reviv’st,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Succourest;⁠—this was thy work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was thy life upon earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What is the course of the life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortal men on the earth?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most men eddy about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here and there⁠—eat and drink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chatter and love and hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather and squander, are raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloft, are hurl’d in the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striving blindly, achieving</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing; and, then they die⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perish;⁠—and no one asks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who or what they have been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than he asks what waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the moonlit solitudes mild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the midmost Ocean, have swell’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foam’d for a moment, and gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there are some, whom a thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ardent, unquenchable, fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not with the crowd to be spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not without aim to go round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an eddy of purposeless dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Effort unmeaning and vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah yes, some of us strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not without action to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fruitless, but something to snatch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From dull oblivion, nor all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glut the devouring grave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We, we have chosen our path⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Path to a clear-purposed goal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Path of advance! but it leads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long, steep journey, through sunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gorges, o’er mountains in snow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheerful, with friends, we set forth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, on the height, comes the storm!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thunder crashes from rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rock, the cataracts reply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightnings dazzle our eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roaring torrents have breach’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The track, the stream-bed descends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the place where the wayfarer once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Planted his footstep⁠—the spray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boils o’er its borders; aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unseen snow-beds dislodge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hanging ruin;⁠—alas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Havoc is made in our train!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friends who set forth at our side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falter, are lost in the storm!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We, we only are left!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With frowning foreheads, with lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sternly compress’d, we strain on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On⁠—and at nightfall, at lastl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to the end of our way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the lonely inn ’mid the rocks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the gaunt and taciturn Host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands on the threshold, the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaking his thin white hairs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds his lantern to scan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our storm-beat figures, and asks:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom in our party we bring?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom we have left in the snow?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sadly we answer: We bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only ourselves; we lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sight of the rest in the storm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardly ourselves we fought through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stripp’d, without friends, as we are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friends, companions, and train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The avalanche swept from our side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But thou would’st not <em>alone</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be saved, my father! <em>alone</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conquer and come to thy goal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving the rest in the wild.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were weary, and we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearful, and we, in our march</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fain to drop down and to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still thou turnedst, and still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beckonedst the trembler, and still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gavest the weary thy hand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If, in the paths of the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stones might have wounded thy feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toil or dejection have tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy spirit, of that we saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing! to us thou wert still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheerful, and helpful, and firm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore to thee it was given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many to save with thyself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, at the end of thy day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O faithful shepherd! to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing thy sheep in thy hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And through thee I believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the noble and great who are gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure souls honour’d and blest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By former ages, who else⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such, so soulless, so poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the race of men whom I see⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem’d but a dream of the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem’d but a cry of desire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes! I believe that there lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others like thee in the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not like the men of the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who all round me to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bluster or cringe, and make life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hideous, and arid, and vile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But souls temper’d with fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fervent, heroic, and good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helpers and friends of mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Servants of God!⁠—or sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I not call you? because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not as servants ye knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your Father’s innermost mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His, who unwillingly sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of his little ones lost⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yours is the praise, if mankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath not as yet in its march</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fainted, and fallen, and died!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>See! In the rocks of the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marches the host of mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A feeble, wavering line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where are they tending?⁠—A God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marshall’d them, gave them their goal.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, but the way is so long!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Years they have been in the wild!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sore thirst plagues them; the rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rising all round, overawe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Factions divide them; their host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threatens to break, to dissolve.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, keep, keep them combined!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else, of the myriads who fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That army, not one shall arrive!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sole they shall stray; in the rocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labour for ever in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Die one by one in the waste.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, in such hour of need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of your fainting, dispirited race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye, like angels, appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Radiant with ardour divine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beacons of hope, ye appear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Languor is not in your heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weakness is not in your word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weariness not on your brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye alight in our van; at your voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Panic, despair, flee away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye move through the ranks, recall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stragglers, refresh the outworn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praise, re-inspire the brave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Order, courage, return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes rekindling, and prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow your steps as ye go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye fill up the gaps in our files,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strengthen the wavering line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stablish, continue our march,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On, to the bound of the waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On, to the City of God.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="men-of-genius" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Men of Genius</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Silent, the Lord of the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eyes from the heavenly height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Girt by his far-shining train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Us, who with banners unfurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fight life’ many-chanc’d fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Madly below, in the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus saith the Lord to his own:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“See ye the battle below?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Turmoil of death and of birth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too long let we them groan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haste, arise ye, and go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Carry my peace upon earth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gladly they rise at his call;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gladly they take his command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Gladly descend to the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! How few of them all⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those willing servants⁠—shall stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the Master’s presence again!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some in the tumult are lost:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Baffled, bewilder’d, they stray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Some as prisoners draw breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others⁠—the bravest⁠—are cross’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the height of their bold-follow’d way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By the swift-rushing missile of Death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hardly, hardly shall one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come, with countenance bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O’er the cloud-wrapt, perilous plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Master’s errand well done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe through the smoke of the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Back to his Master again.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="stanzas-composed-at-carnac" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Stanzas Composed at Carnac</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Far on its rocky knoll descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saint Michael’s chapel cuts the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I climb’d;⁠—beneath me, bright and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay the lone coast of Brittany.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bright in the sunset, weird and still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It lay beside the Atlantic wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though the wizard Merlin’s will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet charm’d it from his forest grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Behind me on their grassy sweep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearded with lichen, scrawl’d and grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The giant stones of Carnac sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the mild evening of the May.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No priestly stern procession now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moves through their rows of pillars old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No victims bleed, no Druids bow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheep make the furze-grown aisles their fold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From bush to bush the cuckoo flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The orchis red gleams everywhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold broom with furze in blossom vies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-bells perfume all the air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And o’er the glistening, lonely land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise up, all round, the Christian spires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The church of Carnac, by the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catches the westering sun’s last fires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there across the watery way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, low above the tide at flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sickle-sweep of Quiberon bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose beach once ran with loyal blood!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And beyond that, the Atlantic wide!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All round, no soul, no boat, no hail!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, on the horizon’s verge descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs, touch’d with light, one snowy sail!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! where is he, who should have come<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where that far sail is passing now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past the Loire’s mouth, and by the foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Finistère’s unquiet brow,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Home, round into the English wave?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tarries where the Rock of Spain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mediterranean waters lave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He enters not the Atlantic main.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, could he once have reach’d this air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freshen’d by plunging tides, by showers!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have felt this breath he loved, of fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cool northern fields, and grass, and flowers!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He long’d for it⁠—press’d on!⁠—In vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the Straits fail’d that spirit brave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The South was parent of his pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The South is mistress of his grave.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-southern-night" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Southern Night</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The sandy spits, the shore-lock’d lakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melt into open, moonlit sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soft Mediterranean breaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">At my feet, free.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dotting the fields of corn and vine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like ghosts the huge, gnarl’d olives stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind, that lovely mountain-line!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">While, by the strand,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cette, with its glistening houses white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Curves with the curving beach away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the lighthouse beacons bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Far in the bay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, such a night, so soft, so lone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So moonlit, saw me once of yore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wander unquiet, and my own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Vext heart deplore!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now that trouble is forgot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy memory, thy pain, to-night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brother! and thine early lot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Possess me quite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The murmur of this Midland deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is heard to-night around thy grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There where Gibraltar’s cannon’d steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">O’erfrowns the wave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For there, with bodily anguish keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Indian heats at last fordone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With public toil and private teen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Thou sank’st, alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Slow to a stop, at morning grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see the smoke-crown’d vessel come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow round her paddles dies away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">The seething foam.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A boat is lower’d from her side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah, gently place him on the bench!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spirit⁠—if all have not yet died⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">A breath might quench.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is this the eye, the footstep fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mien of youth we used to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor, gallant boy!⁠—for such thou wast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Still art, to me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The limbs their wonted tasks refuse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The eyes are glazed, thou canst not speak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whiter than thy white burnous</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">That wasted cheek!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Enough! The boat, with quiet shock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unto its haven coming nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touches, and on Gibraltar’s rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Lands thee, to die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah me! Gibraltar’s strand is far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But farther yet across the brine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy dear wife’s ashes buried are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Remote from thine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For there where Morning’s sacred fount</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its golden rain on earth confers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The snowy Himalayan Mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">O’ershadows hers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Strange irony of Fate, alas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which for two jaded English saves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When from their dusty life they pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Such peaceful graves!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In cities should we English lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where cries are rising ever new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And men’s incessant stream goes by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">We who pursue</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our business with unslackening stride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Traverse in troops, with care-fill’d breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soft Mediterranean side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">The Nile, the East,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And see all sights from pole to pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And glance, and nod, and bustle by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never once possess our soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Before we die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not by those hoary Indian hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not by this gracious Midland sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose floor to-night sweet moonshine fills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Should our graves be!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some sage, to whom the world was dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And men were specks, and life a play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who made the roots of trees his bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And once a day</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With staff and gourd his way did bend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To villages and homes of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For food to keep him till he end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">His mortal span,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the pure goal of Being reach;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grey-headed, wrinkled, clad in white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without companion, without speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">By day and night</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pondering God’s mysteries untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tranquil as the glacier snows⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He by those Indian mountains old</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Might well repose!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some grey crusading knight austere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bore Saint Louis company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came home hurt to death, and here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Landed to die;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some youthful troubadour whose tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fill’d Europe once with his love-pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who here outwearied had sunk, and sung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">His dying strain;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some girl who here from castle-bower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With furtive step and cheek of flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt myrtle-hedges all in flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">By moonlight came</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To meet her pirate-lover’s ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the wave-kiss’d marble stair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beckon’d him on, with quivering lip</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And unbound hair,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And lived some moons in happy trance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then learnt his death and pined away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such by these waters of romance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">’Twas meet to lay!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But you⁠—a grave for knight or sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Romantic, solitary, still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O spent ones of a work-day age!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Befits you ill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So sang I; but the midnight breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down to the brimm’d moon-charmèd main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes softly through the olive-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And checks my strain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I think of her, whose gentle tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All plaint in her own cause controll’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thee I think, my brother! young</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">In heart, high-soul’d;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That comely face, that cluster’d brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That cordial hand, that bearing free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see them still, I see them now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Shall always see!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And what but gentleness untired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what but noble feeling warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever shown, howe’er inspired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Is grace, is charm?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What else is all these waters are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What else is steep’d in lucid sheen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What else is bright, what else is fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">What else serene?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mild o’er her grave, ye mountains, shine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gently by his, ye waters, glide!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that in you which is divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">They were allied.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="saint-brandan" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Saint Brandan</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Saint Brandan sails the northern main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brotherhoods of saints are glad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He greets them once, he sails again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So late!⁠—such storms!⁠—The Saint is mad!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He heard, across the howling seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chime convent bells on wintry nights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw on spray-swept Hebrides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twinkle the monastery-lights;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But north, still north, Saint Brandan steer’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now no bells, no convents more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hurtling Polar lights are near’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea without a human shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At last⁠—(it was the Christmas night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stars shone after a day of storm)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sees float past an iceberg white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on it⁠—Christ!⁠—a living form!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That furtive mien, that scowling eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hair that red and tufted fell⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is⁠—Oh, where shall Brandan fly?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The traitor Judas, out of hell!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Palsied with terror, Brandan sate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon was bright, the iceberg near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hears a voice sigh humbly: “Wait!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By high permission I am here.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“One moment wait, thou holy man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On earth my crime, my death, they knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My name is under all men’s ban;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, tell them of my respite too!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tell them, one blessed Christmas night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(It was the first after I came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathing self-murder, frenzy, spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rue my guilt in endless flame)⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I felt, as I in torment lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid the souls plagued by heavenly power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An angel touch mine arm, and say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Go hence and cool thyself an hour!</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Ah, whence this mercy, Lord?’ I said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>The Leper recollect</em>, said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Who ask’d the passers-by for aid,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>In Joppa, and thy charity.</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then I remember’d how I went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Joppa, through the public street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One morn, when the sirocco spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its storms of dust, with burning heat;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And in the street a leper sate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shivering with fever, naked, old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sand raked his sores from heel to pate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hot wind fever’d him five-fold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He gazed upon me as I pass’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And murmur’d: <em>Help me, or I die!</em>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the poor wretch my cloak I cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw him look eased, and hurried by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh, Brandan, think what grace divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What blessing must true goodness shower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If semblance of it faint, like mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath such inestimable power!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well-fed, well-clothed, well-friended, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did that chance act of good, that one!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then went my way to kill and lie⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgot my good as soon as done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That germ of kindness, in the womb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mercy caught, did not expire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outlives my guilt, outlives my doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And friends me in the pit of fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Once every year, when carols wake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On earth, the Christmas-night’s repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arising from the sinners’ lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I journey to these healing snows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I stanch with ice my burning breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silence balm my whirling brain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Brandan! to this hour of rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Joppan leper’s ease was pain.”⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Tears started to Saint Brandan’s eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bow’d his head; he breathed a prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he look’d up⁠—tenantless lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The iceberg in the frosty air!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="heines-grave" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Heine’s Grave</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“<em>Henri Heine</em>”⁠—’tis here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That black tombstone, the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carved there⁠—no more! and the smooth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swarded alleys, the limes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch’d with yellow by hot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summer, but under them still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In September’s bright afternoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadow, and verdure, and cool!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trim Montmartre! the faint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmur of Paris outside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crisp everlasting-flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yellow and black, on the graves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Half blind, palsied, in pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither to come, from the streets’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uproar, surely not loath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wast thou, Heine!⁠—to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiet! to ask for closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shutters, and darken’d room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cool drinks, and an eased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Posture, and opium, no more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither to come, and to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the wings of Renown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! not little, when pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is most quelling, and man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easily quell’d, and the fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Temper of genius alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickest to ill, is the praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to have yielded to pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No small boast, for a weak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of mankind, to the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pinn’d by the thunder, to rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bolt-scathed front to the stars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, undaunted, retort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Gainst thick-crashing, insane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tyrannous tempests of bale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrowy lightnings of soul!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hark! through the alley resounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mocking laughter! A film</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creeps o’er the sunshine; a breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruffles the warm afternoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saddens my soul with its chill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gibing of spirits in scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shakes every leaf of the grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mars the benignant repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this amiable home of the dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bitter spirits! ye claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heine?⁠—Alas, he is yours!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a moment I long’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in the quiet to snatch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From such mates the outworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poet, and steep him in calm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a moment! I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose he was who is here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buried, I knew he was yours!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, I knew that I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here no sepulchre built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the laurell’d rock, o’er the blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naples bay, for a sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tender Virgil! no tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Ravenna sands, in the shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ravenna pines, for a high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Austere Dante! no grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the Avon side, in the bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stratford meadows, for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shakespeare! loveliest of souls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peerless in radiance, in joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What so harsh and malign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heine! distils from thy life?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poisons the peace of thy grave?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I chide with thee not, that thy sharp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upbraidings often assail’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>England, my country; for we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearful and sad, for her sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since, deep in our hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echo the blame of her foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We, too, sigh that she flags;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We, too, say that she now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce comprehending the voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her greatest, golden-mouth’d sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a former age any more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stupidly travels her round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mechanic business, and lets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow die out of her life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glory, and genius, and joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So thou arraign’st her, her foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So we arraign her, her sons.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, we arraign her! but she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weary Titan! with deaf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ears, and labour-dimm’d eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regarding neither to right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor left, goes passively by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staggering on to her goal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing on shoulders immense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atlanteän, the load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well-nigh not to be borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the too vast orb of her fate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But was it thou⁠—I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely it was⁠—that bard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unnamed, who, Goethe said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Had every other gift, but wanted love;</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love, without which the tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even of angels sounds amiss?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Charm is the glory which makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Song of the poet divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is the fountain of charm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How without charm wilt thou draw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poet! the world to thy way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not by the lightnings of wit!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not by the thunder of scorn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These to the world, too, are given;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wit it possesses, and scorn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charm is the poet’s alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Hollow and dull are the great,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>And artists envious, and the mob profane.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know all this, we know!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cam’st thou from heaven, O child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of light! but this to declare?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! to help us forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such barren knowledge awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God gave the poet his song.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therefore a secret unrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tortured thee, brilliant and bold!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore triumph itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tasted amiss to thy soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore, with blood of thy foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trickled in silence thine own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore the victor’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke on the field of his fame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! as of old, from the pomp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Italian Milan, the fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flower of marble of white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Southern palaces⁠—steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Border’d by statues, and walks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Terraced, and orange bowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy with fragrance⁠—the blond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>German Kaiser full oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long’d himself back to the fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rivers, and high-roof’d towns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his native Germany; so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, how often! from hot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paris drawing-rooms, and lamps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blazing, and brilliant crowds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starr’d and jewell’d, of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famous, of women the queens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dazzling converse, and fumes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of praise⁠—hot, heady fumes, to the poor brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mount, that madden!⁠—how oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heine’s spirit outworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long’d itself out of the din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the tranquil, the cool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far German home of his youth!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>See! in the May afternoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the fresh short turf of the Hartz,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A youth, with the foot of youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heine! thou climbest again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up, through the tall dark firs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warming their heads in the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chequering the grass with their shade⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up, by the stream with its huge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moss-hung boulders and thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Musical water half-hid⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up, o’er the rock-strewn slope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the sinking sun, and the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chill, and the shadows now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long on the grey hill-side⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the stone-roof’d hut at the top.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or, yet later, in watch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the roof of the Brocken-tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou standest, gazing! to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broad red sun, over field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forest and city and spire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mist-track’d stream of the wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide German land, going down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a bank of vapours⁠—again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standest! at nightfall, alone!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or, next morning, with limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rested by slumber, and heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freshen’d and light with the May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the gracious spurs coming down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Lower Hartz, among oaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beechen coverts, and copse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hazels green in whose depth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilse, the fairy transform’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a thousand water-breaks light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pours her petulant youth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climbing the rock which juts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the valley, the dizzily perch’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rock! to its Iron Cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more thou cling’st; to the Cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clingest! with smiles, with a sigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Goethe, too, had been there.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the long-past winter he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the frozen Hartz, with his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passionate, eager, his youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in ferment;⁠—but he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destined to work and to live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left it, and thou, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only to laugh and to die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But something prompts me: Not thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take leave of Heine, not thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak the last word at his grave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in pity and not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With half censure⁠—with awe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail, as it passes from earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattering lightnings, that soul!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The spirit of the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholding the absurdity of men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their vaunts, their feats⁠—let a sardonic smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one short moment wander o’er his lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>That smile was Heine!</em>⁠—for its earthly hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strange guest sparkled; now ’tis pass’d away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That was Heine! and we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myriads who live, who have lived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are we all, but a mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A single mood, of the life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Being in whom we exist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who alone is all things in one.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Spirit, who fillest us all!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit, who utterest in each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New-coming son of mankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such of thy thoughts as thou wilt!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou, one of whose moods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitter and strange, was the life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Heine⁠—his strange, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bitter life⁠—may a life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other and milder be mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May’st thou a mood more serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happier, have utter’d in mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May’st thou the rapture of peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep have embreathed at its core;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made it a ray of thy thought!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made it a beat of thy joy!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-picture-at-newstead" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Picture at Newstead</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What made my heart, at Newstead, fullest swell?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas not the thought of Byron, of his cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stormily sweet, his Titan agony;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the sight of that Lord Arundel</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who struck, in heat, the child he loved so well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his child’s reason flicker’d, and did die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Painted (he will’d it) in the gallery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hang; the picture doth the story tell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Behold the stern, mail’d father, staff in hand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little fair-hair’d son, with vacant gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where no more lights of sense or knowledge are!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Methinks the woe, which made that father stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baring his dumb remorse to future days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was woe than Byron’s woe more tragic far.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="rachel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rachel</h2>
			<section id="rachel-1">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In Paris all look’d hot and like to fade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brown in the garden of the Tuileries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brown with September, droop’d the chestnut-trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas dawn; a brougham roll’d through the streets and made</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Halt at the white and silent colonnade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the French Theatre. Worn with disease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rachel, with eyes no gazing can appease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sate in the brougham and those blank walls survey’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She follows the gay world, whose swarms have fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Switzerland, to Baden, to the Rhine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why stops she by this empty play-house drear?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, where the spirit its highest life hath led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All spots, match’d with that spot, are less divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Rachel’s Switzerland, her Rhine, is here!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="rachel-2">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Unto a lonely villa in a dell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the fragrant warm Provençal shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dying Rachel in a chair they bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up the steep pine-plumed paths of the Estrelle,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And laid her in a stately room, where fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shadow of a marble Muse of yore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rose-crown’d queen of legendary lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Polymnia⁠—full on her death-bed. ’Twas well!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fret and misery of our northern towns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this her life’s last day, our poor, our pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our jangle of false wits, our climate’s frowns,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Do for this radiant Greek-soul’d artist cease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sole object of her dying eyes remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beauty and the glorious art of Greece.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="rachel-3">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sprung from the blood of Israel’s scatter’d race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At a mean inn in German Aarau born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To forms from antique Greece and Rome uptorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trick’d out with a Parisian speech and face,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Imparting life renew’d, old classic grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, soothing with thy Christian strain forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A-Kempis! her departing soul outworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While by her bedside Hebrew rites have place⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, not the radiant spirit of Greece alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had⁠—one power, which made her breast its home!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her, like us, there clash’d, contending powers,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Germany, France, Christ, Moses, Athens, Rome.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strife, the mixture in her soul, are ours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her genius and her glory are her own.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="east-london" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">East London</h2>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas August, and the fierce sun overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote on the squalid streets of Bethnal Green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pale weaver, through his windows seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Spitalfields, look’d thrice dispirited;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I met a preacher there I knew, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ill and o’erwork’d, how fare you in this scene?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bravely!” said he; “for I of late have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much cheer’d with thoughts of Christ, <em>the living bread</em>.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O human soul! as long as thou canst so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set up a mark of everlasting light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the howling senses’ ebb and flow,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To cheer thee, and to right thee if thou roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not with lost toil thou labourest through the night!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mak’st the heaven thou hop’st indeed thy home.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="west-london" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">West London</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Crouch’d on the pavement, close by Belgrave Square</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tramp I saw, ill, moody, and tongue-tied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A babe was in her arms, and at her side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A girl; their clothes were rags, their feet were bare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some labouring men, whose work lay somewhere there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass’d opposite; she touch’d her girl, who hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across, and begg’d, and came back satisfied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rich she had let pass with frozen stare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thought I: Above her state this spirit towers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will not ask of aliens, but of friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sharers in a common human fate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She turns from that cold succour, which attends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unknown little from the unknowing great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And points us to a better time than ours.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-better-part" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Better Part</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Long fed on boundless hopes, O race of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How angrily thou spurn’st all simpler fare!</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Christ,</em> some one says, <em>was human as we are</em>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>No judge eyes us from Heaven, our sin to scan;</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><em>We live no more, when we have done our span</em>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well, then, for Christ,” thou answerest, “who can care?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sin, which Heaven records not, why forbear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live we like brutes our life without a plan!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So answerest thou; but why not rather say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hath man no second life?⁠—Pitch this one high!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits there no judge in Heaven, our sin to see?⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“More strictly, then, the inward judge obey!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Christ a man like us?⁠—Ah! let us try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we then, too, can be such men as he!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="immortality" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Immortality</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Foil’d by our fellow-men, depress’d, outworn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We leave the brutal world to take its way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, <em>Patience! in another life</em>, we say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>The world shall be thrust down, and we up-borne!</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And will not, then, the immortal armies scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world’s poor, routed leavings; or will they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who fail’d under the heat of this life’s day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Support the fervours of the heavenly morn?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No, no! the energy of life may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept on after the grave, but not begun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he who flagg’d not in the earthly strife,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From strength to strength advancing⁠—only he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His soul well-knit, and all his battles won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounts, and that hardly, to eternal life.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="worldly-place" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Worldly Place</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<em>Even in a palace, life may be led well!</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So spake the imperial sage, purest of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marcus Aurelius.⁠—But the stifling den</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of common life, where, crowded up pell-mell,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our freedom for a little bread we sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drudge under some foolish master’s ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who rates us, if we peer outside our pen⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Match’d with a palace, is not this a hell?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><em>Even in a palace!</em> On his truth sincere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who spoke these words, no shadow ever came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when my ill-school’d spirit is aflame</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some nobler, ampler stage of life to win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll stop, and say: “There were no succour here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aids to noble life are all within.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-divinity" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Divinity</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, write it in the rock!” Saint Bernard said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Grave it on brass with adamantine pen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis God himself becomes apparent, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God’s wisdom and God’s goodness are display’d,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For God of these his attributes is made.”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well spake the impetuous Saint, and bore of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The suffrage captive; now, not one in ten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recalls the obscure opposer he outweigh’d.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><em>God’s wisdom</em> and <em>God’s goodness!</em>⁠—Ay, but fools</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mis-define these till God knows them no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Wisdom and goodness, they are God!</em>⁠—what schools</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Have yet so much as heard this simpler lore?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This no Saint preaches, and this no Church rules;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis in the desert, now and heretofore.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-good-shepherd-with-the-kid" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Good Shepherd with the Kid</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<em>He saves the sheep, the goats he doth not save!</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So rang Tertullian’s sentence, on the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that unpitying Phrygian sect<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> which cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Him can no fount of fresh forgiveness lave,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who sins, once wash’d by the baptismal wave!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So spake the fierce Tertullian. But she sigh’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The infant Church; of love she felt the tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stream on her from her Lord’s yet recent grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then she smiled, and in the Catacombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eye suffused but heart inspired true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On those walls subterranean, where she hid</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her head in ignominy, death, and tombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She her Good Shepherd’s hasty image drew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his shoulders, not a lamb, a kid.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="austerity-of-poetry" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Austerity of Poetry</h2>
			<p>
				<span>That son of Italy who tried to blow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere Dante came, the trump of sacred song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his light youth amid a festal throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sate with his bride to see a public show.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fair was the bride, and on her front did glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth like a star; and what to youth belong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gay raiment, sparkling gauds, elation strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A prop gave way! crash fell a platform! lo,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mid struggling sufferers, hurt to death, she lay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shuddering they drew her garments off⁠—and found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A robe of sackcloth next the smooth, white skin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such, poets, is your bride, the Muse! young, gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Radiant, adorn’d outside; a hidden ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thought and of austerity within.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="east-and-west" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">East and West</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In the bare midst of Anglesey they show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two springs which close by one another play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, “Thirteen hundred years agone,” they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Two saints met often where those waters flow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“One came from Penmon westward, and a glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whiten’d his face from the sun’s fronting ray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eastward the other, from the dying day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he with unsunn’d face did always go.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><em>Seiriol the Bright, Kybi the Dark,</em> men said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Seër from the East was then in light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Seër from the West was then in shade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! now ’tis changed. In conquering sunshine bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man of the bold West now comes array’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He of the mystic East is touch’d with night.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="monicas-last-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Monica’s Last Prayer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh could thy grave at home, at Carthage, be!”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Care not for that, and lay me where I fall.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Everywhere heard will be the judgment-call.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>But at God’s altar, oh! remember me.</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Monica, and died in Italy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet fervent had her longing been, through all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her course, for home at last, and burial</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her own husband, by the Libyan sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Had been; but at the end, to her pure soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All tie with all beside seem’d vain and cheap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And union before God the only care.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Creeds pass, rites change, no altar standeth whole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet we her memory, as she pray’d, will keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep by this: <em>Life in God, and union there!</em></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="palladium" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Palladium</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Set where the upper streams of Simois flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was the Palladium, high ’mid rock and wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hector was in Ilium, far below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fought, and saw it not, but there it stood!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It stood; and sun and moonshine rain’d their light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the pure columns of its glen-built hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backward and forward roll’d the waves of fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round Troy; but while this stood, Troy could not fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, in its lovely moonlight, lives the soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mountains surround it, and sweet virgin air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold plashing, past it, crystal waters roll;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We visit it by moments, ah! too rare!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We shall renew the battle in the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow; red with blood will Xanthus be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hector and Ajax will be there again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helen will come upon the wall to see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then we shall rust in shade, or shine in strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fluctuate ’twixt blind hopes and blind despairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fancy that we put forth all our life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never know how with the soul it fares.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still doth the soul, from its lone fastness high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon our life a ruling effluence send;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when it fails, fight as we will, we die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while it lasts, we cannot wholly end.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="thyrsis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="title">Thyrsis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></h2>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">A Monody, to Commemorate the Author’s Friend, Arthur Hugh Clough, Who Died at Florence, 1861</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Thus yesterday, to-day, to-morrow come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They hustle one another and they pass;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But all our hustling morrows only make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The smooth to-day of God.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>From Lucretius, an unpublished Tragedy</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>How changed is here each spot man makes or fills!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the two Hinkseys nothing keeps the same;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The village street its haunted mansion lacks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the sign is gone Sibylla’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And from the roofs the twisted chimney-stacks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Are ye too changed, ye hills?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See, ’tis no foot of unfamiliar men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To-night from Oxford up your pathway strays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here came I often, often, in old days;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thyrsis and I; we still had Thyrsis then.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Runs it not here, the track by Childsworth Farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up past the wood, to where the elm-tree crowns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The hill behind whose ridge the sunset flames?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The signal-elm, that looks on Ilsley Downs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The Vale, the three lone weirs, the youthful Thames?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">This winter-eve is warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Humid the air; leafless, yet soft as spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The tender purple spray on copse and briers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And that sweet City with her dreaming spires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She needs not June for beauty’s heightening,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lovely all times she lies, lovely to-night!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only, methinks, some loss of habit’s power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Befalls me wandering through this upland dim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once pass’d I blindfold here, at any hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Now seldom come I, since I came with him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">That single elm-tree bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the west⁠—I miss it! is it gone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">We prized it dearly; while it stood, we said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Our friend, the Scholar-Gipsy, was not dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the tree lived, he in these fields lived on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Too rare, too rare, grow now my visits here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But once I knew each field, each flower, each stick;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And with the country-folk acquaintance made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By barn in threshing-time, by new-built rick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here, too, our shepherd-pipes we first assay’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Ah me! this many a year</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My pipe is lost, my shepherd’s-holiday!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Needs must I lose them, needs with heavy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Into the world and wave of men depart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Thyrsis of his own will went away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It irk’d him to be here, he could not rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He loved each simple joy the country yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He loved his mates; but yet he could not keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that a shadow lower’d on the fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here with the shepherds and the silly sheep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Some life of men unblest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knew, which made him droop, and fill’d his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He went; his piping took a troubled sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of storms that rage outside our happy ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could not wait their passing, he is dead!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, some tempestuous morn in early June,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the year’s primal burst of bloom is o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Before the roses and the longest day⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When garden-walks, and all the grassy floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With blossoms, red and white, of fallen May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And chestnut-flowers are strewn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So have I heard the cuckoo’s parting cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the wet field, through the vext garden-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Come with the volleying rain and tossing breeze:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<em>The bloom is gone, and with the bloom go I.</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Too quick despairer, wherefore wilt thou go?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soon will the high Midsummer pomps come on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Soon will the musk carnations break and swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soon shall we have gold-dusted snapdragon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sweet-William with his homely cottage-smell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And stocks in fragrant blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roses that down the alleys shine afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And open, jasmine-muffled lattices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And groups under the dreaming garden-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the full moon, and the white evening-star.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He hearkens not! light comer, he is flown!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What matters it? next year he will return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And we shall have him in the sweet spring-days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whitening hedges, and uncrumpling fern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And blue-bells trembling by the forest-ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And scent of hay new-mown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Thyrsis never more we swains shall see!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">See him come back, and cut a smoother reed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And blow a strain the world at last shall heed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Time, not Corydon, hath conquer’d thee.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alack, for Corydon no rival now!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when Sicilian shepherds lost a mate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Some good survivor with his flute would go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Piping a ditty sad for Bion’s fate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And cross the unpermitted ferry’s flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And relax Pluto’s brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make leap up with joy the beauteous head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of Proserpine, among whose crownèd hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Are flowers, first open’d on Sicilian air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And flute his friend, like Orpheus, from the dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O easy access to the hearer’s grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Dorian shepherds sang to Proserpine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For she herself had trod Sicilian fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She knew the Dorian water’s gush divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">She knew each lily white which Enna yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Each rose with blushing face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She loved the Dorian pipe, the Dorian strain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But ah, of our poor Thames she never heard!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Her foot the Cumner cowslips never stirr’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we should tease her with our plaint in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well! wind-dispers’d and vain the words will be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, Thyrsis, let me give my grief its hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the old haunt, and find our tree-topp’d hill!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, if not I, for questing here hath power?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I know the wood which hides the daffodil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">I know the Fyfield tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know what white, what purple fritillaries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The grassy harvest of the river-fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Above by Ensham, down by Sandford, yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what sedg’d brooks are Thames’s tributaries;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I know these slopes; who knows them if not I?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But many a dingle on the loved hill-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With thorns once studded, old, white-blossom’d trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where thick the cowslips grew; and, far descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">High tower’d the spikes of purple orchises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Hath since our day put by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The coronals of that forgotten time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Down each green bank hath gone the ploughboy’s team,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And only in the hidden brookside gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Primroses, orphans of the flowery prime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where is the girl, who, by the boatman’s door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above the locks, above the boating throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Unmoor’d our skiff, when, through the Wytham flats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Red loosestrife and blond meadow-sweet among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And darting swallows, and light water-gnats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">We track’d the shy Thames shore?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where are the mowers, who, as the tiny swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of our boat passing heav’d the river-grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Stood with suspended scythe to see us pass?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They all are gone, and thou art gone as well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, thou art gone! and round me too the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In ever-nearing circle weaves her shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I see her veil draw soft across the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I feel her slowly chilling breath invade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The cheek grown thin, the brown hair sprent with grey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">I feel her finger light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laid pausefully upon life’s headlong train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The foot less prompt to meet the morning dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The heart less bounding at emotion new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hope, once crush’d, less quick to spring again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And long the way appears, which seem’d so short</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the unpractis’d eye of sanguine youth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And high the mountain-tops, in cloudy air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mountain-tops where is the throne of Truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Tops in life’s morning-sun so bright and bare!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Unbreachable the fort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the long-batter’d world uplifts its wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And strange and vain the earthly turmoil grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And near and real the charm of thy repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And night as welcome as a friend would fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But hush! the upland hath a sudden loss</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of quiet;⁠—Look! adown the dusk hill-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A troop of Oxford hunters going home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As in old days, jovial and talking, ride!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From hunting with the Berkshire hounds they come⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Quick, let me fly, and cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into yon further field!⁠—’Tis done; and see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Back’d by the sunset, which doth glorify</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The orange and pale violet evening-sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bare on its lonely ridge, the Tree! the Tree!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I take the omen! Eve lets down her veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The white fog creeps from bush to bush about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The west unflushes, the high stars grow bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the scatter’d farms the lights come out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I cannot reach the Signal-Tree to-night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Yet, happy omen, hail!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hear it from thy broad lucent Arno vale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">(For there thine earth-forgetting eyelids keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The morningless and unawakening sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under the flowery oleanders pale),</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hear it, O Thyrsis, still our Tree is there!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah, vain! These English fields, this upland dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">These brambles pale with mist engarlanded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That lone, sky-pointing tree, are not for him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To a boon southern country he is fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And now in happier air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wandering with the great Mother’s train divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">(And purer or more subtle soul than thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I trow, the mighty Mother doth not see!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within a folding of the Apennine,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou hearest the immortal strains of old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Putting his sickle to the perilous grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the hot cornfield of the Phrygian king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thee the Lityerses song again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Young Daphnis with his silver voice doth sing;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Sings his Sicilian fold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sheep, his hapless love, his blinded eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And how a call celestial round him rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And heavenward from the fountain-brink he sprang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the marvel of the golden skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There thou art gone, and me thou leavest here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sole in these fields; yet will I not despair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Despair I will not, while I yet descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Neath the mild canopy of English air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That lonely Tree against the western sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Still, still these slopes, ’tis clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our Gipsy-Scholar haunts, outliving thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fields where soft sheep from cages pull the hay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Woods with anemonies in flower till May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Know him a wanderer still; then why not me?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A fugitive and gracious light he seeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shy to illumine; and I seek it too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">This does not come with houses or with gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With place, with honour, and a flattering crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’Tis not in the world’s market bought and sold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But the smooth-slipping weeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drop by, and leave its seeker still untired;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Out of the heed of mortals he is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He wends unfollow’d, he must house alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet on he fares, by his own heart inspired.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou too, O Thyrsis, on like quest wert bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou wanderedst with me for a little hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Men gave thee nothing, but this happy quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If men esteem’d thee feeble, gave thee power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">If men procured thee trouble, gave thee rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And this rude Cumner ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its fir-topped Hurst, its farms, its quiet fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here cam’st thou in thy jocund youthful time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here was thine height of strength, thy golden prime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still the haunt beloved a virtue yields.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What though the music of thy rustic flute</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kept not for long its happy, country tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Lost it too soon, and learnt a stormy note</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of men contention-tost, of men who groan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which task’d thy pipe too sore, and tired thy throat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">It fail’d, and thou wast mute;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet hadst thou alway visions of our light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And long with men of care thou couldst not stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And soon thy foot resumed its wandering way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left human haunt, and on alone till night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Too rare, too rare, grow now my visits here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid city-noise, not, as with thee of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thyrsis, in reach of sheep-bells is my home!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then through the great town’s harsh, heart-wearying roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Let in thy voice a whisper often come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">To chase fatigue and fear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<em>Why faintest thou? I wander’d till I died.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>Roam on! The light we sought is shining still.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>Dost thou ask proof? Our Tree yet crowns the hill,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<em>Our Scholar travels yet the loved hillside.</em>
				</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="epilogue-to-lessings-laocoon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epilogue to Lessing’s Laocoön</h2>
			<p>
				<span>One morn as through Hyde Park we walk’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friend and I, by chance we talk’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lessing’s famed Laocoön;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after we awhile had gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Lessing’s track, and tried to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What painting is, what poetry⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diverging to another thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah,” cries my friend, “but who hath taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why music and the other arts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oftener perform aright their parts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than poetry? why she, than they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fewer fine successes can display?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“For ’tis so, surely! Even in Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where best the poet framed his piece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in that Phoebus-guarded ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pausanias on his travels found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good poems, if he look’d, more rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Though many) than good statues were⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For these, in truth, were everywhere!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bards full many a stroke divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Dante’s, Petrarch’s, Tasso’s line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The land of Ariosto show’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, e’en there, the canvas glow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With triumphs, a yet ampler brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Raphael and his brotherhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobly perfect, in our day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of haste, half-work, and disarray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Profound yet touching, sweet yet strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath risen Goethe’s, Wordsworth’s song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet even I (and none will bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeper to these!) must needs allow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They yield us not, to soothe our pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such multitude of heavenly strains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from the kings of sound are blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mozart, Beethoven, Mendelssohn.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">While thus my friend discoursed, we pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the path, and take the grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grass had still the green of May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still the unblacken’d elms were gay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kine were resting in the shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flies a summer murmur made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright was the morn and south the air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soft-couch’d cattle were as fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As those that pastured by the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That old-world morn, in Sicily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When on the beach the Cyclops lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Galatea from the bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mock’d her poor lovelorn giant’s lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Behold,” I said, “the painter’s sphere!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The limits of his art appear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The passing group, the summer morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grass, the elms, that blossom’d thorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those cattle couch’d, or, as they rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their shining flanks, their liquid eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, or much greater things, but caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like these, and in one aspect brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In outward semblance he must give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment’s life of things that live;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let him choose his moment well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With power divine its story tell!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still we walk’d on, in thoughtful mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now upon the Bridge we stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of sweet breathings was the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sudden stirs and pauses fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down o’er the stately Bridge the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came rustling from the garden trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the sparkling waters play’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light-plashing waves an answer made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mimic boats their haven near’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond, the Abbey towers appear’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By mist and chimneys unconfined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free to the sweep of light and wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While through their earth-moor’d nave below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another breath of wind doth blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sound as of wandering breeze⁠—but sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In laws by human artists bound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The world of music!” I exclaim’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This breeze that rustles by, that famed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abbey recall it! what a sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large and profound, hath genius here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inspired musician what a range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What power of passion, wealth of change!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some source of feeling he must choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And its lock’d fount of beauty use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the stream of music tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its else unutterable spell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To choose it rightly is his part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And press into its inmost heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Miserere, Domine!</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The words are utter’d, and they flee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep is their penitential moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mighty their pathos, but ’tis gone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have declared the spirit’s sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sore load, and words can do no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beethoven takes them then⁠—those two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor, bounded words⁠—and makes them new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infinite makes them, makes them young;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transplants them to another tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they can now, without constraint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour all the soul of their complaint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roll adown a channel large</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wealth divine they have in charge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Page after page of music turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still they live and still they burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eternal, passion-fraught, and free⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="la">Miserere, Domine!</i>”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Onward we moved, and reach’d the Ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where gaily flows the human tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar, in rest the cattle lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We heard, afar, faint music play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But agitated, brisk, and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men, with their stream of life, were here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some hang upon the rails, and some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On foot, behind them, go and come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This through the Ride upon his steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goes slowly by, and this at speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young, the happy, and the fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old, the sad, the worn were there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some vacant, and some musing went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some in talk and merriment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nods, smiles, and greetings, and farewells!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now and then, perhaps, there swells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sigh, a tear⁠—but in the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All changes fast, and hies along;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hies, ah, from whence, what native ground?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to what goal, what ending, bound?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Behold, at last the poet’s sphere!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who,” I said, “suffices here?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For, ah! so much he has to do!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be painter and musician too!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aspect of the moment show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feeling of the moment know!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aspect not, I grant, express</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear as the painter’s art can dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feeling not, I grant, explore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So deep as the musician’s lore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But clear as words can make revealing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deep as words can follow feeling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, ah, then comes his sorest spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of toil! he must life’s <em>movement</em> tell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thread which binds it all in one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not its separate parts alone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The movement he must tell of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its pain and pleasure, rest and strife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye must travel down, at full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long, unpausing spectacle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With faithful unrelaxing force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attend it from its primal source,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From change to change and year to year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attend it of its mid career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attend it to the last repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And solemn silence of its close.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“The cattle rising from the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thought must follow where they pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The penitent with anguish bow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thought must follow through the crowd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, all this eddying, motley throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sparkles in the sun along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girl, statesman, merchant, soldier bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Master and servant, young and old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grave, gay, child, parent, husband, wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He follows home, and lives their life!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And many, many are the souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life’s movement fascinates, controls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It draws them on, they cannot save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their feet from its alluring wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cannot leave it, they must go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its unconquerable flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, ah, how few of all that try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This mighty march, do aught but die!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ill prepared for such a way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill found in strength, in wits, are they!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They faint, they stagger to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wandering from the stream they go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pain, in terror, in distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They see, all round, a wilderness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes a momentary gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They catch of the mysterious stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes, a second’s space, their ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmur of its waves doth hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That transient glimpse in song they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not as painter can portray!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That transient sound in song they tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not, as the musician, well!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when at last their snatches cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they are silent and at peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stream of life’s majestic whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath ne’er been mirror’d on their soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Only a few the life-stream’s shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With safe unwandering feet explore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untired its movement bright attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow its windings to the end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from its brimming waves their eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drinks up delighted ecstasy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And its deep-toned, melodious voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever makes their ear rejoice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They speak! the happiness divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They feel, runs o’er in every line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its spell is round them like a shower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It gives them pathos, gives them power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No painter yet hath such a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor no musician made, as they;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gather’d on immortal knolls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such lovely flowers for cheering souls!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beethoven, Raphael, cannot reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charm which Homer, Shakespeare, teach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these, to these, their thankful race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives, then, the first, the fairest place!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brightest is their glory’s sheen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For greatest hath their labour been.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-wish" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Wish</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I ask not that my bed of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From bands of greedy heirs be free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For these besiege the latest breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fortune’s favour’d sons, not me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I ask not each kind soul to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tearless, when of my death he hears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let those who will, if any, weep!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are worse plagues on earth than tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I ask but that my death may find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The freedom to my life denied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask but the folly of mankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, then at last, to quit my side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spare me the whispering, crowded room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friends who come, and gape, and go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ceremonious air of gloom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All, which makes death a hideous show!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor bring, to see me cease to live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some doctor full of phrase and fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shake his sapient head and give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ill he cannot cure a name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor fetch, to take the accustom’d toll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the poor sinner bound for death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother doctor of the soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To canvass with official breath</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The future and its viewless things⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That undiscover’d mystery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which one who feels death’s winnowing wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must needs read clearer, sure, than he!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bring none of these! but let me be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While all around in silence lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved to the window near, and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more, before my dying eyes</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bathed in the sacred dews of morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wide aerial landscape spread⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world which was ere I was born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world which lasts when I am dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Which never was the friend of <em>one</em>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor promised love it could not give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lit for all its generous sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lived itself, and made us live.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There let me gaze, till I become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In soul with what I gaze on wed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel the universe my home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have before my mind⁠—instead</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of the sick-room, the mortal strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The turmoil for a little breath⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pure eternal course of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not human combatings with death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus feeling, gazing, let me grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Composed, refresh’d, ennobled, clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then willing let my spirit go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To work or wait elsewhere or here!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="obermann-once-more" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Obermann Once More</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p xml:lang="fr">Savez-vous quelque bien qui console du regret d’un monde?</p>
					<cite>Obermann</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Glion?⁠—Ah, twenty years, it cuts<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>All meaning from a name!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White houses prank where once were huts!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glion! but not the same,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet I know not. All unchanged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The turf, the pines, the sky!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hills in their old order ranged!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lake, with Chillon by!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, ’neath those chestnut-trees, where stiff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stony mounts the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crackling husk-heaps burn, as if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I left them yesterday.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Across the valley, on that slope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The huts of Avant shine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its pines under their branches ope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ways for the tinkling kine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Full-foaming milk-pails, Alpine fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet heaps of fresh-cut grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invite to rest the traveller there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before he climb the pass⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The gentian-flower’d pass, its crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With yellow spires aflame,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence drops the path to Allière down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walls where Byron came,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By their green river who doth change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His birth-name just below⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orchard, and croft, and full-stored grange</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursed by his pastoral flow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But stop!⁠—to fetch back thoughts that stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond this gracious bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cone of Jaman, pale and grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, in the blue profound!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, Jaman! delicately tall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above his sun-warm’d firs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What thoughts to me his rocks recall!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What memories he stirs!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And who but thou must be, in truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obermann! with me here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou master of my wandering youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But left this many a year!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, I forget the world’s work wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its warfare waged with pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An eremite with thee, in thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more I slip my chain</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And to thy mountain-chalet come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lie beside its door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear the wild bee’s Alpine hum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy sad, tranquil lore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again I feel the words inspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their mournful calm⁠—serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet tinged with infinite desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all that <em>might</em> have been,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The harmony from which man swerved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made his life’s rule once more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The universal order served!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth happier than before!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While thus I mused, night gently ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down over hill and wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, still and sudden, Obermann</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the grass near me stood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Those pensive features well I knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On my mind, years before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imaged so oft, imaged so true!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shepherd’s garb he wore,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A mountain-flower was in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A book was in his breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent on my face, with gaze which scann’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul, his eyes did rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And is it thou,” he cried, “so long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held by the world which we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved not, who turnest from the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to thy youth and me?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And from thy world, with heart opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choosest thou <em>now</em> to turn?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah me, we anchorites knew it best!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Best can its course discern!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou fledd’st me when the ungenial earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou soughtest, lay in gloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return’st thou in her hour of birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hopes and hearts in bloom?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well-nigh two thousand years have brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their load, and gone away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since last on earth there lived and wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A world like ours to-day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Like ours it look’d in outward air!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its head was clear and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sumptuous its clothing, rich its fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No pause its action knew;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stout was its arm, each thew and bone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem’d puissant and alive⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, ah, its heart, its heart was stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so it could not thrive!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“On that hard Pagan world disgust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And secret loathing fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep weariness and sated lust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made human life a hell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In his cool hall, with haggard eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Roman noble lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drove abroad, in furious guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the Appian way;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He made a feast, drank fierce and fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crown’d his hair with flowers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No easier nor no quicker pass’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The impracticable hours.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The brooding East with awe beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her impious younger world;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Roman tempest swell’d and swell’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on her head was hurl’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The East bow’d low before the blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In patient, deep disdain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She let the legions thunder past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plunged in thought again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So well she mused, a morning broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across her spirit grey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A conquering, new-born joy awoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fill’d her life with day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Poor world,’ she cried, ‘so deep accurst!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That runn’st from pole to pole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek a draught to slake thy thirst⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, seek it in thy soul!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She heard it, the victorious West!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In crown and sword array’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She felt the void which mined her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shiver’d and obey’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She veil’d her eagles, snapp’d her sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid her sceptre down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her stately purple she abhorr’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her imperial crown;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She broke her flutes, she stopp’d her sports,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her artists could not please;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She tore her books, she shut her courts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She fled her palaces;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lust of the eye and pride of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She left it all behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hurried, torn with inward strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wilderness to find.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tears wash’d the trouble from her face!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She changed into a child!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid weeds and wrecks she stood⁠—a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ruin⁠—but she smiled!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh, had I lived in that great day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How had its glory new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill’d earth and heaven, and caught away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My ravish’d spirit too!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No cloister-floor of humid stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been too cold for me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For me no Eastern desert lone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been too far to flee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No thoughts that to the world belong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had stood against the wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of love which set so deep and strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Christ’s then open grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No lonely life had pass’d too slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I could hourly see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wan, nail’d Form, with head droop’d low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the bitter tree;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Could see the Mother with the Child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose tender winning arts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have to his little arms beguiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many wounded hearts!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And centuries came, and ran their course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unspent all that time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, still went forth that Child’s dear force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still was at its prime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ay, ages long endured his span</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life ’tis true received,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gracious Child, that thorn-crown’d Man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lived while we believed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“While we believed, on earth he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And open stood his grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men call’d from chamber, church, and tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Christ was by to save.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now he is dead. Far hence he lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the lorn Syrian town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his grave, with shining eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Syrian stars look down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In vain men still, with hoping new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regard his death-place dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say the stone is not yet to,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wait for words to come.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah, from that silent sacred land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sun, and arid stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crumbling wall, and sultry sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes now one word alone!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“From David’s lips this word did roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis true and living yet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>No man can save his brother’s soul,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Nor pay his brother’s debt.</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alone, self-poised, henceforth man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must labour; must resign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His all too human creeds, and scan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Simply the way divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But slow that tide of common thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bathed our life, retired.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow, slow the old world wore to naught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pulse by pulse expired.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Its frame yet stood without a breach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When blood and warmth were fled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still it spake its wonted speech⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But every word was dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And oh, we cried, that on this corse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might fall a freshening storm!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rive its dry bones, and with new force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new-sprung world inform!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Down came the storm! In ruins fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The outworn world we knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It pass’d, that elemental swell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again appear’d the blue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The sun shone in the new-wash’d sky⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what from heaven saw he?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blocks of the past, like icebergs high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Float on a rolling sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Upon them ply the race of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All they before endeavour’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They come and go, they work and plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And know not they are sever’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Poor fragments of a broken world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon we pitch our tent!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why were ye too to death not hurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When your world’s day was spent?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That glow of central fire is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which with its fusing flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knit all your parts, and kept you one;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ye, ye are the same!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The past, its mask of union on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had ceased to live and thrive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The past, its mask of union gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, is it more alive?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Your creeds are dead, your rites are dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your social order too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where tarries he, the Power who said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>See, I make all things new?</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The millions suffer still, and grieve;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what can helpers heal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With old-world cures men half believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For woes they wholly feel?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And yet men have such need of joy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joy whose grounds are true!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joy that should all hearts employ</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when the past was new!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah, not the emotion of that past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its common hope, were vain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new such hope must dawn at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or man must toss in pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But now the past is out of date,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The new is not yet born⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who can be <em>alone</em> elate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the world lies forlorn?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then to the wilderness I fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There among Alpine snows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pastoral huts I hid my head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought and found repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It was not yet the appointed hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad, patient, and resign’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I watch’d the crocus fade and flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I felt the sun and wind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The day I lived in was not mine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man gets no second day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dreams I saw the future shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ah, I could not stay!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Action I had not, followers, fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pass’d obscure, alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The after-world forgets my name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor do I wish it known.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Gloom-wrapt within, I lived and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew my life was vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fate I murmur not, nor chide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Sèvres by the Seine</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“(If Paris that brief flight allow)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My humble tomb explore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It bears: <em>Eternity, be thou</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>My refuge!</em> and no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But thou, whom fellowship of mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did make from haunts of strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to my mountain solitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And learn my frustrate life;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O thou, who, ere thy flying span</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was past of cheerful youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst seek the solitary man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love his cheerless truth⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Despair not thou as I despair’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor be cold gloom thy prison!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward the gracious hours have fared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see! the sun is risen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He melts the icebergs of the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A green, new earth appears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Millions, whose life in ice lay fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have thoughts, and smiles, and tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The world’s great order dawns in sheen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After long darkness rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divinelier imaged, clearer seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With happier zeal pursued.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“With hope extinct and brow composed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mark’d the present die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its term of life was nearly closed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet it had more than I.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But thou, though to the world’s new hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou come with aspect marr’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shorn of the joy, the bloom, the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which best befits its bard;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Though more than half thy years be past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spent thy youthful prime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though, round thy firmer manhood cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hang weeds of our sad time,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Whereof thy youth felt all the spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And traversed all the shade⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though late, though dimm’d, though weak, yet tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope to a world new-made!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Help it to fill that deep desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dream which fill’d our brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fix’d in our soul a thirst like fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immedicable pain!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Which to the wilderness drove out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our life, to Alpine snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And palsied all our word with doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all our work with woe⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What still of strength is left, employ</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That end to help attain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>One common wave of thought and joy</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Lifting mankind again!</em>”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The vision ended. I awoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As out of sleep, and no</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Voice moved⁠—only the torrent broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silence, far below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soft darkness on the turf did lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solemn, o’er hut and wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the yet star-sown nightly sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peak of Jaman stood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still in my soul the voice I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Obermann⁠—away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I turned; by some vague impulse stirr’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the rocks of Naye</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Sonchaud’s piny flanks I gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blanch’d summit bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Malatrait, to where in haze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Valais opens fair,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the domed Velan with his snows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the upcrowding hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth all the heavenly opening close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the Rhone’s murmur fills⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And glorious there, without a sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the glimmering lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High in the Valais depth profound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the morning break.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="persistency-of-poetry" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Persistency of Poetry</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Though the Muse be gone away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though she move not earth to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souls, erewhile who caught her word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! still harp on what they heard.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="bacchanalia-or-the-new-age" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Bacchanalia; or, the New Age</h2>
			<section id="bacchanalia-or-the-new-age-1">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The evening comes, the fields are still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tinkle of the thirsty rill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unheard all day, ascends again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserted is the new-reap’d grain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent the sheaves! the ringing wain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reaper’s cry, the dogs’ alarms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All housed within the sleeping farms!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The business of the day is done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last belated gleaner gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the thyme upon the height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the elder-blossom white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pale dog-roses in the hedge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the mint-plant in the sedge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In puffs of balm the night-air blows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perfume which the day forgoes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the pure horizon far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, pulsing with the first-born star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The liquid sky above the hill!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The evening comes, the fields are still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Loitering and leaping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With saunter, with bounds⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flickering and circling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In files and in rounds⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gaily their pine-staff green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tossing in air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loose o’er their shoulders white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showering their hair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See! the wild Maenads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Break from the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth and Iacchus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maddening their blood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See! through the quiet land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rioting they pass⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fling the piled sheaves about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trample the grass!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tear from the rifled hedge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Garlands, their prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill with their sports the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill with their cries!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shepherd, what ails thee, then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shepherd, why mute?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth with thy joyous song!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth with thy flute!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tempts not the revel blithe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lure not their cries?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glow not their shoulders smooth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melt not their eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not, on cheeks like those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lovely the flush?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<em>Ah, so the quiet was!</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>So was the hush!</em>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="bacchanalia-or-the-new-age-2">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The epoch ends, the world is still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The age has talk’d and work’d its fill⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The famous orators have done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The famous poets sung and gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The famous men of war have fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The famous speculators thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The famous players, sculptors, wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The famous painters fill’d their wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The famous critics judged it all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The combatants are parted now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uphung the spear, unbent the bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The puissant crown’d, the weak laid low!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the after-silence sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now strife is hush’d, our ears doth meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ascending pure, the bell-like fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this or that down-trodden name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicate spirits, push’d away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the hot press of the noon-day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er the plain, where the dead age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did its now silent warfare wage⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er that wide plain, now wrapt in gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where many a splendour finds its tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many spent fames and fallen mights⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one or two immortal lights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rise slowly up into the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shine there everlastingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like stars over the bounding hill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The epoch ends, the world is still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thundering and bursting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In torrents, in waves⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carolling and shouting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over tombs, amid graves⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See! on the cumber’d plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clearing a stage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scattering the past about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes the new age!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bards make new poems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinkers new schools,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Statesmen new systems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Critics new rules!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things begin again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life is their prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth with their deeds they fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill with their cries!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Poet, what ails thee, then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, why so mute?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth with thy praising voice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth with thy flute!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loiterer! why sittest thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunk in thy dream?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tempts not the bright new age?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shines not its stream?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look, ah, what genius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art, science, wit!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soldiers like Caesar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Statesmen like Pitt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sculptors like Phidias,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raphaels in shoals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poets like Shakespeare⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful souls!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, on their glowing cheeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavenly the flush!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<em>Ah, so the silence was!</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>So was the hush!</em>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The world but feels the present’s spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet feels the past as well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever men have done, might do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever thought, might think it too.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="growing-old" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Growing Old</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What is it to grow old?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it to lose the glory of the form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lustre of the eye?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it for beauty to forego her wreath?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, but not this alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is it to feel our strength⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not our bloom only, but our strength⁠—decay?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it to feel each limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow stiffer, every function less exact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each nerve more weakly strung?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, this, and more! but not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, ’tis not what in youth we dream’d ’twould be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not to have our life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mellow’d and soften’d as with sunset glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden day’s decline!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis not to see the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from a height, with rapt prophetic eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heart profoundly stirr’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weep, and feel the fullness of the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The years that are no more!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is to spend long days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not once feel that we were ever young.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is to add, immured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hot prison of the present, month</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To month with weary pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is to suffer this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feel but half, and feebly, what we feel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in our hidden heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Festers the dull remembrance of a change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But no emotion⁠—none.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is⁠—last stage of all⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we are frozen up within, and quite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The phantom of ourselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear the world applaud the hollow ghost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which blamed the living man.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-progress-of-poesy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Progress of Poesy</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Variation</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Youth rambles on life’s arid mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strikes the rock, and finds the vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brings the water from the fount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fount which shall not flow again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The man mature with labour chops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the bright stream a channel grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sees not that the sacred drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran off and vanish’d out of hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the old man totters nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feebly rakes among the stones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mount is mute, the channel dry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down he lays his weary bones.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-nameless-epitaph" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Nameless Epitaph</h2>
			<section id="a-nameless-epitaph-1">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>This sentence have I left behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An aching body, and a mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not wholly clear, nor wholly blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too keen to rest, too weak to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That travails sore, and brings forth wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are God’s worst portion to mankind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-nameless-epitaph-2">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ask not my name, O friend!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Being only, which hath known each man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the beginning, can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember each unto the end.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="the-last-word" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Last Word</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Creep into thy narrow bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creep, and let no more be said!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain thy onset! all stands fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou thyself must break at last.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let the long contention cease!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Geese are swans, and swans are geese.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them have it how they will!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art tired; best be still!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They out-talk’d thee, hiss’d thee, tore thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better men fared thus before thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fired their ringing shot and pass’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hotly charged⁠—and broke at last.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Charge once more, then, and be dumb!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the victors, when they come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the forts of folly fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find thy body by the wall!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="pis-aller" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Pis Aller</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“Man is blind because of sin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revelation makes him sure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without that, who looks within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks in vain, for all’s obscure.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nay, look closer into man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me, can you find indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing sure, no moral plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear prescribed, without your creed?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No, I nothing can perceive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without that, all’s dark for men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, or nothing, I believe.”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For God’s sake, believe it then!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="new-rome" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">New Rome</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Lines Written for Miss Story’s Album</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>The armless Vatican Cupid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hangs down his beautiful head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the priests have got him in prison,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Psyche long has been dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But see, his shaven oppressors</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begin to quake and disband!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Times</i>, that bright Apollo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proclaims salvation at hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And what,” cries Cupid, “will save us?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Says Apollo: “<em>Modernise Rome!</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>What inns! Your streets, too, how narrow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too much of palace and dome!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O learn of London, whose paupers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are not pushed out by the swells!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide streets with fine double trottoirs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then⁠—the London hotels!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The armless Vatican Cupid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hangs down his head as before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through centuries past it has hung so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will through centuries more.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="rome-sickness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rome-Sickness</h2>
			<p>
				<span>To daily tasks we set our hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft the spirit, pent at home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaks out and longs for Switzerland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Longs oftener yet and pines for Rome.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I pass’d to-day o’er Walton Heath⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The coming spring-time’s earliest stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickened and moved, a happy breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In moss, and gorse, and shining fir.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fortunate firs! who never think</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How firs less curst by Fortune’s frown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er Glion fringe the mountain’s brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or dot the slopes to Vevey down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I cross’d <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> George’s Hill to-day⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There in the leaf-strewn copse I found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tender foxglove-plants display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their first green muffle on the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They envy not, this tranquil brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cyclamens whose blossoms fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fragrance all Frascati’s wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the gracious Alban Hill!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Man only, with eternal bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To come and go, to shift and range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At life and living not content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chafes in his place, and pines for change.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet happy⁠—since his feverish blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaves him no rest, and change he will⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When restlessness is restless good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still mending, lessening, human ill!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Unwearied, as from land to land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The incessant wanderer takes his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hold the light and reach the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To all who sink, to all who stray!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ss-lusitania" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.S.</abbr>
					<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lusitania</i>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle"><i epub:type="se:name.publication">Nineteenth Century</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>, January, 1879</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I read in Dante how that horned light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which hid Ulysses, waved itself and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Following the sun, we set our vessel’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great main; pass’d Seville on the right</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And Ceuta on the left; then southward sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And last in air, far off, dim rose a Height.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cheer’d; but from it rush’d a blast of might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And struck⁠—and o’er us the sea-waters spread.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I dropp’d the book, and of my child I thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his long black ship speeding night and day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er those same seas; dark Teneriffe rose, fraught</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With omen; “Oh! were that Mount pass’d,” I say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the door opens and this card is brought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Reach’d Cape Verde Islands, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lusitania</i>.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="geists-grave" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Geist’s Grave</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Four years!⁠—and didst thou stay above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground, which hides thee now, but four?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that life, and all that love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were crowded, Geist! into no more?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Only four years those winning ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which make me for thy presence yearn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call’d us to pet thee or to praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear little friend! at every turn?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That loving heart, that patient soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had they indeed no longer span,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To run their course, and reach their goal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And read their homily to man?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That liquid, melancholy eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whose pathetic, soul-fed springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem’d surging the Virgilian cry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sense of tears in mortal things⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That steadfast, mournful strain, consoled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By spirits gloriously gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And temper of heroic mould⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What, was four years their whole short day?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, only four!⁠—and not the course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the centuries yet to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not the infinite resource</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nature, with her countless sum</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of figures, with her fullness vast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of new creation evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can ever quite repeat the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or just thy little self restore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Stern law of every mortal lot!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which man, proud man, finds hard to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And builds himself I know not what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of second life I know not where.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But thou, when struck thine hour to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On us, who stood despondent by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A meek last glance of love didst throw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And humbly lay thee down to die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet would we keep thee in our heart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would fix our favourite on the scene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor let thee utterly depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be as if thou ne’er hadst been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so there rise these lines of verse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On lips that rarely form them now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While to each other we rehearse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Such ways, such arts, such looks hadst thou!</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We stroke thy broad brown paws again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We bid thee to thy vacant chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We greet thee by the window-pane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We hear thy scuffle on the stair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We see the flaps of thy large ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick raised to ask which way we go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crossing the frozen lake, appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy small black figure on the snow!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor to us only art thou dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who mourn thee in thine English home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast thine absent master’s tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropt by the far Australian foam.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy memory lasts both here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shall live as long as we.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after that⁠—thou dost not care!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In us was all the world to thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet, fondly zealous for thy fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to a date beyond our own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We strive to carry down thy name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By mounded turf, and graven stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We lay thee, close within our reach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, where the grass is smooth and warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the holly and the beech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where oft we watch’d thy couchant form,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Asleep, yet lending half an ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To travellers on the Portsmouth road;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There build we thee, O guardian dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mark’d with a stone, thy last abode!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then some, who through this garden pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we too, like thyself, are clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall see thy grave upon the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stop before the stone, and say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<em>People who lived here long ago</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Did by this stone, it seems, intend</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>To name for future times to know</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>The dachshund, Geist, their little friend.</em>
				</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="westminster-abbey" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Westminster Abbey</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">July 25, 1881</p>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">(The Day of Burial, in the Abbey, of Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, Dean of Westminster.)</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">What! for a term so scant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Our shining visitant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheer’d us, and now is pass’d into the night?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Couldst thou no better keep, O Abbey old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The boon thy dedication-sign foretold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presence of that gracious inmate, light?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">A child of light appear’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither he came, late-born and long-desired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And to men’s hearts this ancient place endear’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What, is the happy glow so soon expired?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">—Rough was the winter eve;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Their craft the fishers leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down over the Thames the darkness drew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">One still lags last, and turns, and eyes the Pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Huge in the gloom, across in Thorney Isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Sebert’s work, the wondrous Minster new.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">—’Tis Lambeth now, where then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They moor’d their boats among the bulrush stems;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And that new Minster in the matted fen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world-famed Abbey by the westering Thames.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">His mates are gone, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">For mist can scarcely see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strange wayfarer coming to his side⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who bade him loose his boat, and fix his oar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And row him straightway to the further shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wait while he did there a space abide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The fisher awed obeys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That voice had note so clear of sweet command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Through pouring tide he pulls, and drizzling haze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sets his freight ashore on Thorney strand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">The Minster’s outlined mass</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Rose dim from the morass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thitherward the stranger took his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Lo, on a sudden all the Pile is bright!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nave, choir and transept glorified with light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While tongues of fire on coign and carving play!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And heavenly odours fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come streaming with the floods of glory in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And carols float along the happy air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the reign of joy did now begin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">Then all again is dark;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And by the fisher’s bark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unknown passenger returning stands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>O Saxon fisher! thou hast had with thee</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>The fisher from the Lake of Galilee⁠—</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So saith he, blessing him with outspread hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Then fades, but speaks the while:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>At dawn thou to King Sebert shalt relate</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">
					<em>How his <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Peter’s Church in Thorney Isle</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Peter, his friend, with light did consecrate.</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">Twelve hundred years and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Along the holy floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pageants have pass’d, and tombs of mighty kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Efface the humbler graves of Sebert’s line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And, as years sped, the minster-aisles divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew used to the approach of Glory’s wings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Arts came, and arms, and law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And majesty, and sacred form and fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Only that primal guest the fisher saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light, only light, was slow to reappear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">The Saviour’s happy light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Wherein at first was dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His boon of life and immortality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In desert ice of subtleties was spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or drown’d in mists of childish wonderment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fond fancies here, there false philosophy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And harsh the temper grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men with mind thus darken’d and astray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And scarce the boon of life could struggle through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For want of light which should the boon convey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">Yet in this latter time</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The promise of the prime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem’d to come true at last, O Abbey old!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">It seem’d, a child of light did bring the dower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Foreshown thee in thy consecration-hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in thy courts his shining freight unroll’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Bright wits, and instincts sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And goodness warm, and truth without alloy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And temper sweet, and love of all things pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joy in light, and power to spread the joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">And on that countenance bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Shone oft so high a light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That to my mind there came how, long ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Lay on the hearth, amid a fiery ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The charm’d babe of the Eleusinian king⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His nurse, the Mighty Mother, will’d it so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Warm in her breast, by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slumber’d, and ambrosia balm’d the child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But all night long amid the flames he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the hearth, and play’d with them, and smiled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">But once, at midnight deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">His mother woke from sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw her babe amidst the fire, and scream’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A sigh the Goddess gave, and with a frown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Pluck’d from the fire the child, and laid him down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then raised her face, and glory round her stream’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The mourning-stole no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mantled her form, no more her head was bow’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But raiment of celestial sheen she wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beauty fill’d her, and she spake aloud:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">“O ignorant race of man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Achieve your good who can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If your own hands the good begun undo?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Had human cry not marr’d the work divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Immortal had I made this boy of mine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now his head to death again is due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And I have now no power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto this pious household to repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Their kindness shown me in my wandering hour.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—She spake, and from the portal pass’d away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">The Boy his nurse forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And bore a mortal lot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since, his name is heard on earth no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In some chance battle on Cithaeron-side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The nursling of the Mighty Mother died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went where all his fathers went before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">—On thee too, in thy day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of childhood, Arthur! did some check have power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That, radiant though thou wert, thou couldst but stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringer of heavenly light, a human hour?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">Therefore our happy guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Knew care, and knew unrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weakness warn’d him, and he fear’d decline.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And in the grave he laid a cherish’d wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And men ignoble harass’d him with strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deadly airs his strength did undermine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Then from his Abbey fades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound beloved of his victorious breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And light’s fair nursling stupor first invades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And next the crowning impotence of death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">But hush! This mournful strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Which would of death complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oracle forbade, not ill-inspired.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That Pair, whose head did plan, whose hands did forge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The Temple in the pure Parnassian gorge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finish’d their work, and then a meed required.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">“Seven days,” the God replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Live happy, then expect your perfect meed!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Quiet in sleep, the seventh night, they died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death, death was judged the boon supreme indeed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">And truly he who here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Hath run his bright career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And served men nobly, and acceptance found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And borne to light and right his witness high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">What could he better wish than then to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wait the issue, sleeping underground?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Why should he pray to range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the long age of truth that ripens slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And break his heart with all the baffling change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the tedious tossing to and fro?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">For this and that way swings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The flux of mortal things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though moving inly to one far-set goal.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">What had our Arthur gain’d, to stop and see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">After light’s term, a term of cecity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Church once large and then grown strait in soul?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">To live, and see arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alternating with wisdom’s too short reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Folly revived, re-furbish’d sophistries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pullulating rites externe and vain?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">Ay me! ’Tis deaf, that ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Which joy’d my voice to hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would I not disturb thee from thy tomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thus sleeping in thine Abbey’s friendly shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the rough waves of life for ever laid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not break thy rest, nor change thy doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Even as my father, thou⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as that loved, that well-recorded friend⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hast thy commission done; ye both may now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait for the leaven to work, the let to end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">And thou, O Abbey grey!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Predestined to the ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By this dear guest over thy precinct shed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fear not but that thy light once more shall burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Once more thine immemorial gleam return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though sunk be now this bright, this gracious head!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Let but the light appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy transfigured walls be touch’d with flame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our Arthur will again be present here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again from lip to lip will pass his name.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="poor-matthias" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Poor Matthias</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Poor Matthias!⁠—Found him lying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall’n beneath his perch and dying?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found him stiff, you say, though warm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All convulsed his little form?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor canary! many a year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well he knew his mistress dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in vain you call his name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly raise his rigid frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly warm him in your breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly kiss his golden crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smooth his ruffled plumage fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch his trembling beak with wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One more gasp⁠—it is the end!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead and mute our tiny friend!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Songster thou of many a year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now thy mistress brings thee here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Says, it fits that I rehearse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tribute due to thee, a verse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meed for daily song of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent now for evermore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Poor Matthias! Wouldst thou have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than pity? claim’st a stave?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Friends more near us than a bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We dismiss’d without a word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rover, with the good brown head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Atossa, they are dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead, and neither prose nor rhyme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tells the praises of their prime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst know them old and grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know them in their sad decay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast seen Atossa sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit for hours beside thy cage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst chirp, thou foolish bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flutter, chirp⁠—she never stirr’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What were now these toys to her?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down she sank amid her fur;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyed thee with a soul resign’d⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou deemedst cats were kind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Cruel, but composed and bland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dumb, inscrutable and grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Tiberius might have sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had Tiberius been a cat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Rover died⁠—Atossa too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less than they to us are you!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearer human were their powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closer knit their life with ours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hands had stroked them, which are cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now for years, in churchyard mould;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comrades of our past were they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that unreturning day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changed and aging, they and we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt, it seem’d, in sympathy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alway from their presence broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhat which remembrance woke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the loved, the lost, the young⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet they died, and died unsung.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Geist came next, our little friend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Geist had verse to mourn his end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, but that enforcement strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which compell’d for Geist a song⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that gay courageous cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that human pathos dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soul-fed eyes with suffering worn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pain heroically borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faithful love in depth divine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor Matthias, were they thine?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Max and Kaiser we to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greet upon the lawn at play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Max a dachshund without blot⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kaiser should be, but is not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Max, with shining yellow coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prinking ears and dewlap throat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kaiser, with his collie face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Penitent for want of race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Which may be the first to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain to augur, they or I!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as age comes on, I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poet’s fire gets faint and low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If so be that travel they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First the inevitable way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much I doubt if they shall have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dirge from me to crown their grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yet, poor bird, thy tiny corse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moves me, somehow, to remorse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something haunts my conscience, brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad, compunctious visitings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other favourites, dwelling here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open lived to us, and near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well we knew when they were glad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plain we saw if they were sad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy’d with them when they were gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soothed them in their last decay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sympathy could feel and show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both in weal of theirs and woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Birds, companions more unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live beside us, but alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finding not, do all they can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passage from their souls to man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindness we bestow, and praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laud their plumage, greet their lays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, beneath their feather’d breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stirs a history unexpress’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wishes there, and feelings strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incommunicably throng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What they want, we cannot guess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fail to track their deep distress⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dull look on when death is nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Note no change, and let them die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor Matthias! couldst thou speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What a tale of thy last week!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every morning did we pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stupid salutations gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suited well to health, but how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mocking, how incongruous now!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cake we offer’d, sugar, seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never doubtful of thy need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praised, perhaps, thy courteous eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praised thy golden livery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gravely thou the while, poor dear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat’st upon thy perch to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixing with a mute regard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Us, thy human keepers hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Troubling, with our chatter vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ebb of life, and mortal pain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Us, unable to divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our companion’s dying sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or o’erpass the severing sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set betwixt ourselves and thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the sand thy feathers smirch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fallen dying off thy perch!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Was it, as the Grecian sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Birds were born the first of things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the sun, before the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the gods, before mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Airy, ante-mundane throng⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Witness their unworldly song!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proof they give, too, primal powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a prescience more than ours⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach us, while they come and go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When to sail, and when to sow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cuckoo calling from the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swallow skimming by the mill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swallows trooping in the sedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starlings swirling from the hedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mark the seasons, map our year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they show and disappear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, with all this travail sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought from that anterior age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goes an unreversed decree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby strange are they and we;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making want of theirs, and plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indiscernible by man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">No, away with tales like these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stol’n from Aristophanes!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does it, if we miss your mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prove us so remote in kind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Birds! we but repeat on you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What amongst ourselves we do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhat more or somewhat less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the same unskilfulness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What you feel, escapes our ken⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know we more our fellow men?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Human suffering at our side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, like yours is undescried!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Human longings, human fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Miss our eyes and miss our ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little helping, wounding much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dull of heart, and hard of touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother man’s despairing sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who may trust us to divine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who assure us, sundering powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand not ’twixt his soul and ours?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Poor Matthias! See, thy end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What a lesson doth it lend!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that lesson thou shalt have,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead canary bird, a stave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telling how, one stormy day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stress of gale and showers of spray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove my daughter small and me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inland from the rocks and sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driv’n inshore, we follow down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient streets of Hastings town⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly thread them⁠—when behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>French canary-merchant old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shepherding his flock of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a low dim-lighted pen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scann’d of tramps and fishermen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There a bird, high-coloured, fat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud of port, though something squat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursy, play’d-out Philistine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dazzled Nelly’s youthful eyne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, far in, obscure, there stirr’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his perch a sprightlier bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courteous-eyed, erect and slim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I whisper’d: “Fix on <em>him</em>!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home we brought him, young and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Songs to trill in Surrey air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Matthias sang his fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the cedars of Pains Hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here he pour’d his little soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the murmur of the Mole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eight in number now the years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath pleased our eyes and ears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other favourites he hath known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, and now himself is gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Fare thee well, companion dear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fare for ever well, nor fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiny though thou art, to stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the uncompanion’d way!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We without thee, little friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many years have not to spend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are left, will hardly be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better than we spent with thee.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="kaiser-dead" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Kaiser Dead</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">April 6, 1887</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>What, Kaiser dead? The heavy news</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Post-haste to Cobham calls the Muse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where in Farringford she brews</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The ode sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with Pen-bryn’s bold bard pursues</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">A rival rhyme.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Kai’s bracelet tail, Kai’s busy feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were known to all the village-street.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What, poor Kai dead?” say all I meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">“A loss indeed!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O for the croon pathetic, sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Of Robin’s reed!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Six years ago I brought him down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A baby dog, from London town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round his small throat of black and brown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">A ribbon blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vouch’d by glorious renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">A dachshund true.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His mother, most majestic dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of blood-unmix’d, from Potsdam came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Kaiser’s race we deem’d the same⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">No lineage higher.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so he bore the imperial name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">But ah, his sire!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soon, soon the days conviction bring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The collie hair, the collie swing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tail’s indomitable ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The eye’s unrest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The case was clear; a mongrel thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Kai stood confest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But all those virtues, which commend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The humbler sort who serve and tend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were thine in store, thou faithful friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">What sense, what cheer!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To us, declining tow’rds our end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">A mate how dear!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For Max, thy brother-dog, began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To flag, and feel his narrowing span.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cold, besides, his blue blood ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Since, ’gainst the classes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heard, of late, the Grand Old Man</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Incite the masses.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, Max and we grew slow and sad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Kai, a tireless shepherd-lad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teeming with plans, alert, and glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">In work or play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like sunshine went and came, and bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Live out the day!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still, still I see the figure smart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trophy in mouth, agog to start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, home return’d, once more depart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Or prest together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against thy mistress, loving heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">In winter weather.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I see the tail, like bracelet twirl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In moments of disgrace uncurl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then at a pardoning word re-furl’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">A conquering sign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crying, “Come on, and range the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And never pine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thine eye was bright, thy coat it shone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hadst thine errands, off and on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In joy thy last morn flew; anon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">A fit! All’s over;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou art gone where Geist hath gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And Toss, and Rover.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Poor Max, with downcast, reverent head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regards his brother’s form outspread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full well Max knows the friend is dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Whose cordial talk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And jokes in doggish language said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Beguiled his walk.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Glory, stretch’d at Burwood gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy passing by doth vainly wait;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And jealous Jock, thy only hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The chiel from Skye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lets from his shaggy Highland pate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Thy memory die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well, fetch his graven collar fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rub the steel, and make it shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave it round thy neck to twine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Kai, in thy grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There of thy master keep that sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And this plain stave.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
